===== PDF p50 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 47 
 
Case 21: Athletic Shoe Manufacturer 
Company: Deloitte Consulting (Strategy & Operations) 
 
The 3rd largest athletic shoe company in the US has hired your consulting firm to determine why its 
profits are declining while the profits of its two competitors are growing.    
 
Instructions to interviewer: This case was presented by Deloitte’s recruitment team in a case 
practice workshop at one of the top business schools. This case is narrated in a highly interactive 
style just to demonstrate how a relaxed approach can help a candidate. 
 
• Candidate: Can I have a moment to think through this? 
• Interviewer: Absolutely. 
• Candidate: If profits are down, that’s got to be a function of either revenues decreasing or 
costs increasing.  Let’s focus on the cost side: are the client’s costs in line with those of its 
competitors?  For example, are their manufacturing costs similar?  Do they manufacture and 
assemble in low-cost offshore locations?  What about selling and distribution costs?  Is the 
client spending too much on a dedicated sales force when its competitors use independent 
reps?  What about general and administrative expenses?  Does the client have flashy office 
space or overpaid executives? 
• Narrator: This is much better!  The candidate gets off to a good start by setting up the answer 
effectively.  The “revenues – costs = profits” equation is simple, but it provides a clear way to 
proceed through the problem.  It lets your interviewer know that you understand a basic 
business relationship and that you have a plan for rooting out the answer.  In addition, the 
candidate is asking good questions – at least half the battle in consulting is knowing what 
questions to ask. 
• Interviewer: Those are all good questions.  But the client’s costs all seem to be in line with 
those of its competitors.  Costs don’t seem to be the problem.  What would you look at next? 
• Candidate: If the cost side isn’t the problem, then I would look at revenues next.  Are sales 
declining? 
• Narrator: The candidate takes the hint and moves on to revenues. 
• Interviewer: Actually, yes, revenue is down 6% from last year, and projections show another 
5% dip for the coming year.  How would you go about figuring out why? 
• Narrator: A pointed question from the candidate has brought forth more specific information 
that will help in the consideration of the case.  The interviewer’s answer means that the 
candidate will have to dig deeper. 
• Candidate: I would try to break sales apart into its relevant components: are sales of certain 
shoe models declining disproportionately to others, for example? 
• Narrator: The candidate might have talked about the two pieces that make up sales: price and 
units.  However, she chooses to break down the sales picture into different product 
categories, which is also fine. 
• Interviewer: Not really, most SKUs – shelf-keeping units equivalent to individual product styles 
– are actually declining at a similar rate.  What would you look at next? 


===== PDF p51 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 48 
 
• Narrator: Looks like another dead-end.  But don’t get depressed – it just means that the 
recruiter has ruled out another possible explanation and narrowed the candidate’s focus a 
little further.  We’re getting warmer. 
• Candidate: If it’s not a few laggard shoes designs driving the downturn for this company, and 
sales are just down overall, it looks more like people have just stopped buying their shoes, 
period.  We need to figure out why.  Who are their biggest customers?  What’s their target 
demographic?  Are they just not buying athletic shoes anymore? 
• Narrator: Having checked a variety of possibilities, the candidate makes a preliminary 
hypothesis and proposes some ways to check this insight.  Even better, she proposes some 
next steps for the inquiry. 
• Interviewer: You’ve hit on the crux of the problem: the company isn’t sure who its customers 
are anymore.  Formerly, its biggest customers were serious athletes interested in high 
performance shoes.  But the company isn’t sure if that’s true anymore.  That’s one of the 
biggest pieces of value we provided for the company – we told them who is buying athletic 
shoes.  How would you go about getting that information? 
• Narrator: The interviewer reveals that the candidate has hit on a key piece of the puzzle.  
Without pausing for breath, the interviewer then checks the candidate’s ability to turn her 
insight into action and her common sense. 
• Candidate: Well frankly, I’d go to the mall!  I’d stand outside Foot Locker and see who’s 
buying athletic shoes, check what brand they’re buying, and maybe even ask them why.  By 
doing this, I’d be able to see that demographic group was buying the most athletic shoes and 
whether they were buying our client’s shoes or not.  If not, I’d try to draw conclusions as to 
why not.  In short, I’d try to segment the athletic shoes market, and figure out how to target 
the most attractive segments. 
• Narrator: The candidate uses a common sense approach here, which is really good.  Not only 
is her idea practical, it would be easy to implement and it would be relatively cheap to do.  
She also shows that she fully understands what information she needs to collect.  Not only 
would she observe customer behavior, and ask them why, she’d also analyze the findings and 
try to draw general implications from them.   
• Interviewer: Well, that’s exactly what we did – we went to the mall.  And our field research 
showed that young adults in the 13- to 24-year old age group were buying 65% of all the 
athletic shoes in the market we looked at.  That makes them the first priority market segment 
for our client.  The next phase of this case is just beginning: we need to put together a plan to 
target this demographic group specifically.  Do you have any ideas? 
• Narrator: Now the consultant is pushing into new territory, trying to see just how far this 
candidate can take the analysis. 
• Candidate: Well, it strikes me that the demographic you’ve described is less concerned with 
high performance (the company’s current focus, you said) and more concerned with the 
image of their shoes.  Do they look cool?  Would Michael Jordan wear them?  That kind of 
thing.  I would recommend putting together a marketing and advertising campaign to really 
pump up their image in the eyes of the young public.   
• Narrator: This comment is based more on the candidate’s intuition and creative thinking, but 
it shows that she fully grasps the nature of the problem. 
• Interviewer: That sounds on track with what we’re thinking about... 
