===== PDF p32 =====
Table of Contents 
 
28
Practice Case 13: Car lubricant  
(Mckinsey - Round 3) 
 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:   
 
Your client is a seller of car lubricant. It has historically made 
significant profits, but recently it has come under threat and we have 
been hired to address three concerns. 
 
1. Over a few previous years consumers believed that they 
needed to change their oil every 10,000 miles. They have 
started to realize that in fact they can get away with only 
changing their oil every 20 ñ 30,000 miles. 
2. Historically in the US 80% of the market is in DIY and 20% in 
DIBSE (Do it by someone else). This has started to shift in 
favor of DIBSE. Our client has a 2nd position in the DIY market 
but only a 10th position in the DIBSE market 
3. The CEO of the lubricant business has promised his 
shareholders a 200% increase in profits over the next 5 years. 
 
What do you suggest we do? 
 
Note: Push the interviewer not to draw a framework  Just outline and discuss 
the issues. 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:  
 
• 
The DIBSE outlets can be broken down as follows: 
o 35% of the market is ìQuick Lubeî, of which 60% is owned by 
one of our major competitors 
o 20% of the market is OEM related dealerships 
o 15% is small ìmum and Popî shops 
o 10% are small regional chains 
o 5% are owned by Wal-Mart who are entering this market 
• 
Our major DIY customer is Wal-Mart, where we are the price leader. 
• 
The margins in DIBSE are half the margins in DIY. 
• 
Additional data for DIBSE market entry: 
Fixed Costs:  
Marketing 
 
45,000 
Rental 
 
36,000 
Equipment 
 
15,000 
Utilities 
 
14,000 
Fixed Labor     (ask how much they expect)  
5 mechanics at  
40,000 each 
• 
The client expects to charge $25 for an oil change and the variable 
costs for an oil change is $20. 


===== PDF p33 =====
Table of Contents 
 
29
• 
Each garage has three bays. Each car change takes 15 minutes. Car 
owners drive their cars themselves onto the bay. 
 
III. Sample solution 
 
First I would explore partnering with Wal-Mart to sell to their DIBSE 
business? 
 
Interviewer: Why would Wal-Mart want to source from us?  
 
Me: I think we can leverage our relationship to Wal-Mart, pointing out that 
people are buying our product in the DIY segment because of our value 
proposition, our brand name and their trust in us. We will continue to 
advertise our product and people are going to ask after it. Secondly as Wal-
Mart is new to the DIBSE business ñ and this is not necessarily a logical 
progression for them ñ using a premium lubricant in their garages will help 
inspire confidence.  
 
Interviewer: How would you structure a deal to protect your margins in the 
DIY business? 
 
Me: I think we should be able to negotiate either a volume agreement, or a 
supply location agreement to protect our DIY business. 
 
Interviewer: OK, what else: 
 
Me: I think we should look at tying up a deal with the OEM garages, by 
focusing on the OEM producers and advertising with them we can link our 
brand to their cars. 
 
Interviewer: That is not going to work. In the US each OEM garage has the 
right to sell what cars he wants to and to use whatever lubricants he wants in 
his garage. The OEMs have no power over the individual garages. 
 
Me: OK, in which case we will need to use our brand presence in the DIY 
segment to create a pull effect onto the garages. For example we can co-
advertise at shows such as the Detroit Auto show to create demand for our 
lubricants when they get their new, expensive, cars oil changed. This will 
create an incentive for individual garages to stock our product. 
 
Interviewer: Good. Now the client has been thinking about vertically 
integrating into the DIBSE business. Do you think that is a good idea? 
 
Me: It will depend on how much margin is available in that business, how 
easily we are able to cross sell to our existing customers and whether there 
are any synergies with our existing business. 
 
 


===== PDF p34 =====
Table of Contents 
 
30
 
Me: In which case, the variable contribution per car change is $5. The total 
fixed cost is $310,000. Hence we need to process 62000 cars per year to 
break even. Assuming we are open 300 days a year, we need to process 
around 200 cars per day to break even. 
200 cars per day ñ assuming a 10 hour day, means we need to process 
around 6.5 cars/bay/hour. 
Our capacity is 4 cars/bay per hour, hence this does not make sense. 
 
Interviewer: So what do you suggest? 
 
Me: Well what we could do is see whether we can use this opportunity to 
cross sell other products to the car owners while they were at our garage. 
 
Interviewer: Good. If we go with that strategy, our price will go up to $48 
and our variable costs will increase to $28, but it will take 45 minutes to 
process each car. 
 
Me: OK, so our variable contribution has now increased to $40, which is 4 
times higher than our previous case. Hence the number of cars we need to 
process/bay/hour will drop to around 1.5. Our capacity has, however, also 
dropped to around 1.2 hence we still can not break even. 
 
Interviewer: good. You bump into the CEO of the firm in the lift, he asks you 
for a summary update, what do you say? 
 
Me: The reason you are loosing profits is a shift in the industry from DIY to 
DIBSE. We believe we can capture some market share in DIBSE through a 
deal with Wal-Mart, and have investigated the possibility of vertically 
integrating into the garage industry ñ but do not currently believe that the 
returns justify the investments. Over the next couple of weeks, my team is 
going to work further to identify further opportunities to use your strong 
brand name to build your presence in the DIBSE segment. 
