===== PDF p44 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
40 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
!"Okay. What else would you want to look at before you can make a final go/no go 
recommendation? 
 
I’d like to evaluate the costs involved with this product launch. One thing to make sure is to 
ensure the product makes a profit.  
 
!"That would be a good thing. Anyway, looks like we are out of time… 
 
 
Coming out of this interview, I was amazed at how broad the issue was and how many details 
there were to keep in mind. The interviewer was quite helpful in guiding me along, but it is really 
easy to get off track. For example, I didn’t quite make the $100 million per idea client 
requirement till the interviewer asked if my estimate of the revenue potential was good enough. 
With different assumptions, I could have come up with very different estimates. I guess there is 
not real right answer, eh? 


===== PDF p45 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
41 
 
The client is a large pharmaceutical firm with a market cap of $85 billion. They have about 4% 
market share and are currently enjoying a 34 P/E ratio. The industry average P/E is about 29. 
Over the next five years they are looking at a healthy growth in their EBIT margins. However, 
for three years thereafter, the EBIT margin growth is likely to stagnate when three of their 
blockbusters come off patent. Subsequently, blockbusters currently in the pipeline will hit the 
market and their EBIT margins are expected to healthy growth levels. The CFO of the firm us to 
help her figure out if the three-year plateau five years out is an issue she should be worried about 
and if so what external options she can pursue to fix it? 
 
I had no real idea how to proceed. I didn’t have a particularly good idea about the pharma 
industry. So there was no particular framework that came to mind. I was going for the “groping 
in the dark” approach! 
 
Interesting. Broadly, I’d like to better understand our client’s position in the industry, then 
explore competitive developments and projected trends and finally explore some possible 
external options.  
 
But let me first try to get a better sense for our client and their strengths particularly financial. 
Can you offer some details? 
 
!"Sure. Our client has about $10 billion in revenues, EBIT runs at about $3 billion. Gross 
margins are quite high at 80% and they are totally debt-free. 
 
I see. What has the client typically done when blockbusters have come out of patent? I believe 
over-the-counter versions are one route. 
 
!"Quite right. They have taken the OTC approach and probably will with these 
blockbusters as well. But this is not a financially attractive option. As soon as the drug 
goes off patent, its price drops to 20% of its pre-OTC price. Margins are consequently 
totally squeezed. Anyway, is this EBIT margin plateau an issue? 
 
Oh, I most certainly believe so. You indicated that the client enjoys an above average P/E. So 
clearly they are doing something right. I’d expect that the market is also aware of this projected 
trend in EBIT margins and the price of the stock probably reflects an expectation that 
management will do something about the trend. I would therefore strongly caution against doing 
nothing.  
 
!"So what would you recommend? 
 
You mentioned external options. Can you clarify what that means? Mergers, acquisitions, and so 
forth? 
 
!"Yes. 
 
I see. Can you tell me more about the industry? Is there any consolidation happening? Are there 
potential merger or acquisition candidates that the client has in mind? 


===== PDF p46 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
42 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
!"Well, consolidation is something that is always happening at different levels. What do 
you think of a merger of equals? 
 
I’d say this is something we can explore if in fact there are similar trends in the industry and 
there is a threat of us being left behind or “overpowered.” If not, then there is the anti-
competitive aspect to worry about. Also I’d be concerned about post-merger integration issues. 
Does the client have experience with mergers and managing post-merger issues? 
 
!"Let’s assume that they don’t. What types of things would advise the client to look out 
for? 
 
There are a few things they should absolutely ensure they do. First, they have make sure that any 
target will offer operational efficiencies that can be exploited. Then, they have to ensure that they 
retain and reward management talent appropriately. This talent will be key from an execution 
perspective and if the client wants to extract all the efficiencies of the merger, retention of 
management is key. Rewarding management and key officers and tying incentives to 
performance is therefore critical. Finally, there has to be a very clear vision articulated and 
tangible, measurable goals established. This is also critical. 
 
!"That’s good. What other external options come to mind? 
 
I’m not very familiar with the pharmaceutical industry and am not sure if there is something 
unique to this industry. There is nothing in particular that jumps out in my mind.  
 
!"Are you familiar with the software industry? 
 
Yes, sort of.  
 
!"Are you aware of the notion of licensing? 
 
Oh yes! 
 
!"Licensing is something that is fairly common the pharma industry. The client can take 
advantage of their marketing prowess and brand image in the market to license potential 
blockbusters that much smaller firms or firms without their clout are currently 
developing and that will hit the market during the three years in question. This way they 
can generate sales to grow their EBIT margins. 
 
Got it. 
 
Leaving this interview, I felt as though I had blown the interview for not having come up with the 
licensing option. In retrospect I probably did a reasonable job. My biggest take-away is that I 
should have sought clarity on what the interviewer meant by “external options.” He wasn’t 
particularly forthcoming with information throughout the interview and preferred to let me talk 
and think out loud. I should have pressed him for a laundry list of what would constitute 
“external options.” I think it’s perfectly alright to ask such a question and then analyze the 
relative merits and demerits of each option before making a recommendation. 
