===== PDF p144 =====
28. Rolls Royce (Bain) 
Stem 
The year is 1990 and your client is the CEO of Rolls Royce ("RR"). He is wonied about his 
business, as he has seen a shmp decline in the demand for luxury cars (there was a global 
slowdown/recession in the early 1990s). RR was selling 3500 cars per year and is now selling at 
a run rate of 1100 cars per year. As you can imagine, RR faces high fixed costs as it attempts to 
keep plants running (due to the expense involved with shutting down plants and laying off 
unionized workers). This has resulted in an increase in inventmy- now 1000 cars are in finished 
goods. 
RR is running at an operating loss of about $1M per week and is cash flow negative .. They are 
owned by a small conglomerate of unrelated businesses (RR is involved in many industries). We 
were asked to develop a turnaround strategy. Keep in mind that (1) the economy is deteriorating, 
(2) we don't have the time or money to fully develop new products, and (3) Mercedes and BMW 
are spending more money than we are on R&D and sales and marketing. 
1st phase: Framework & Growth 
Behind the scenes: There are no right or wrong answers here. It should be an 
organized/structured brainstorming session. The following is an example. Let the interviewee hit 
on as many of these as possible, and any others that he or she comes up with. The key is that the 
interviewee should be structured in brainstorming approach and use good business sense in 
prioritizing. 
Interviewer: How would you go about thinking of a turnaround strategy? 
Possible Answers: When I think about a turn-around strategy, I want to think about ways to 
a)1g_reduce costs. Let's focus first on increasing revenues. 
When I think about increasing revenues, I think about 2 buckets: optimizing.the.c.oreJ2.uf>iness, 
and el[pandiJlg the. business 
markets and/or new products. 
---
---- ·- . 
. 
------·--···--
Under optimizing the revenues of the core business, you have price (you can make arguments for 
.raisi_ng..pri.c.es -the RR customers are unlikely to be price sensitive- or lower prices -
competition is increasing), as well as quantityl'bunQling (you could (I) increase 
promotion/marketing spend, or (2) bundle extended wananties and/or repairs with the cars), and 
PEOd\J.ctmJx: (try to push/promote the most profitable). 
Under expanding the business, you have entering new markets or developing new products. 
\Ve've already discussed that we don't have the time or resources to develop new products, s() 
let's focus on new markets. Here we can focus on new customer segments, new geographies, or 
·-
new di_stribution channels. 
·--- ---- -·· 
137 


===== PDF p145 =====
-;-: 
i • 
. I 
' i 
• 
• 
2"d phase: Cost cutting 
Behind the scenes: Same as previous section ... structured brainstorming, then prioritizing. 
Interviewee should use a clear st1ucture like value chain for thinking through costs and 
prioritizing where to cut. 
Interviewer: And what are the major cost components of this business, and how could we find 
ways to make cuts? 
Possible Answers: When I think about the value chain for RR, you have tbe commodity inputs 
(ie., parts), PP&E expense, labor costs (particularly involving unions), sales and marketing, 
overhead, and distribution. Of those, the top two areas to cut would be labor and distribution 
costs, followed by sales and.warketiug. Marketing could be more focused onjustili:ewealthiest 
customers, g;;-,;uthe 
downturn. 
Jnterviewu: How/where could we cut the number ofemployees without killing the business? 
Possible Answers: Reduce the number of cars produced (and cut line staff), reduce support/OR 
staff, cut sales reps ... 
3rd phase: Inventory 
Interviewer: If we cut car production, what are the factors that would affect the optimal level of 
finished inventory? 
Possible Answers: [Candidate should get these and perhaps more]: The overall level of demand, 
the variability of demand, the number of car models (including degree of customization), the lead 
time necessary to produce another batch of vehicles ... 
Wrap-Up 
Behind the scenes: Simply make sure that the recommendation is clear and concise; incorporates 
the highlights from the case discussion above; and gives crisp rationale for why the paliicular 
actions are being recommended . 
138 
