===== PDF p66 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 62 - 
 Case 15: Low Cost Airline 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Bain 
Round: 2008 Summer, First 
Content: Quantitative and Qualitive 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a private equity firm focused on the transportation industry.  They are 
looking at investing in a start-up low cost airline carrier focused on the route from New 
York to London.  Specifically they are looking to play on JetBlue’s presence at JFK and 
Easyjets presence in Stansted.  Currently there are only large players in the market, no 
low cost carriers for that route.  The question is, should they invest? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: Explain a good structure to answering the case.  Suggest a 
possible framework and a solution. 
 
Key facts:   
Facts that are disclosed during the course of the case 
 Numbers of planes 
o 40 flights between New York and London 
o 300 seats per flight 
o Flights are 90% full 
 Market segmentation 
o 70% of passengers are price sensitive. 
o Sub-fact two 
 Costs to airline per ticket (same for entire market) 
o Planes - $180 
o Fuel - $180 
o Labor - $60 
o Other - $60 
 Competitor ticket price - $450  
 Start-up is in negotiations to procure a plane and has already negotiated space in 
terminals in JFK and Stansted. 


===== PDF p67 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 63 - 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer:  How would you go about answering this? 
 
Interviewee:  To answer this question I would look at several factors.  First I would look 
at the potential for revenue.  I would try to size the market and understand if there is a 
sizable enough market for a new player, and I would examine the price of competitors to 
understand if given the current market size what level of revenue can we expect.  Next I 
would look at the costs of this endeavor and determine whether at ths revenue level this 
business is profitable. 
 
Interviewer:  Good, let’s start with sizing the market.  How would you go about this? 
 
Interviewee:  I would look at all current flights between New York and London and look 
at the breakdown of business versus economy class tickets sold. 
 
Interviewer:  How many flights do you think fly between New York and London per day? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, there are about four US carriers and another two or three British 
carriers and I would guess that they each fly about eight or nine flights per day.  So, 
somewhere between 48 and 54. 
 
Interviewer:  Well, that’s close.  Let’s say that there are about 40 flights per day. 
 
Interviewee:  Then I would look at the number of seats per plan and the percentage of 
those seats that are full. 
 
Interviewer:  Good, let’s say that on average a plane can carry 300 people and is 90% 
full. 
 
Interviewee:  So, if there are 40 flights with 300 people per flight and 90% full, we have 
a market of 40 x 300 x .9 or 10,800 about 11,000. 
 
Interviewer:  Good, now as you mentioned earlier, what % of passengers do you think 
are price sensitive vs. not price sensitive? 
 
Interviewee:  I would guess that the majority of passengers are price sensitive, so I 
would say around 70/30. 
 
Interviewer:  OK, so what is your total potential market? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, we are looking at 70% or 11,000 or 7,700. 
 
Interviewer:  Good, now let’s move to costs.  What costs would need to be considered? 


===== PDF p68 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 64 - 
 
Interviewee:  There are many costs such as planes, fuel, terminal space within JFK and 
Stansted as well as labor including everything from pilots to administrative staff, 
marketing and then various other costs such as food and or amenities aboard the planes. 
 
Interviewer:  Let’s say that their costs are as follows calculate on a per ticket basis:  
plane cost $180, fuel costs $180, labor costs $60, and all other costs are $60.   
 
Interviewee:  Thus the total cost per ticket to this airline is 180 + 180 + 60 + 60 or $480.  
Do we know what the current airlines charge for their tickets? 
 
Interviewer:  Yes, they charge $450 per ticket. 
 
Interviewee:  And do we know what their costs look like? 
 
Interviewer:  You can assume that the $480 per ticket is the same for the entire market’s 
costs per ticket. 
 
Interviewee:  So the competitors are selling their tickets at a loss. 
 
Interviewer:  That is correct, what might be some reasons for this? 
 
Interviewee:  The competitors probably have a very diversified system of routes and can 
thus afford to lose money on their route from New York to London if they make is up on 
shorter routes.  They may also have a large disparity in the rates they charge both using 
business class as well as last minute or peak time reservations to make up for their losses 
on other routes. 
 
Interviewer:  So, if this carrier could reduce their costs to $350 would you recommend 
that they enter the market? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, if they enter the market and undercut the major players, their 
competitors would simply reduce their rates and it would become a price war.  And, since 
their competitors are more diversified and have established brand, they will probably fare 
better under such circumstances. 
 
Interviewer:  What would you tell our client? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, especially since our client is a private equity firm and is looking to 
get in and get out of projects, I would recommend against investing in this market.  The 
returns are small if any, and with such high start up costs it is a very risky venture. 
