===== PDF p7 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 3 - 
Case 1: 
Case 1: 
Case 1: 
Case 1: University Bank
University Bank
University Bank
University Bank 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Boston Consulting Group 
Round: 2007 Summer, First  
Content: Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
In Mexico banks prefer not to lend money to hospitals and schools because if one of these 
institutions defaults the Bank worries that it will be seen as the one responsible for 
liquidating their assets. We have a client who currently owns several universities.  He is 
evaluating whether an opportunity exists to start a bank that would lend money to his 
various universities. There are three questions that he wants us to solve: 
 Is there an opportunity to lend money to universities? 
 If an opportunity exists, how big is it? 
 How should he structure the bank? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: The purpose of this case is to test the interviewee’s ability to 
determine whether it makes sense for the client to open a bank that serves universities.  In 
particular, the interviewee should recognize that he/she needs to gather the necessary 
information to determine the market opportunity for such a bank.  The interviewee should 
ask questions to gather the necessary information to determine the market size.   
 
Key facts: 
 Population in Mexico is: 
o 0-15 years old: 7 million 
o 15-30 years old: 6 million 
o 30-45 years old: 5 million 
 Total number of universities in Mexico: 200 
 Population growth:  close to zero (use zero for the sake of simplicity) 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer: So, given the facts of the case, how would you consider going about 
analyzing this question for the client? 
 
Interviewee: I’d like to understand a few things to evaluate this decision. First, I’d like to 
understand the size of the market to see whether there is an opportunity or not.  Next I 


===== PDF p8 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 4 - 
would like to analyze who are the competitors, if any.  In particular, I am interested in the 
competitors because they may decide to offer similar loans to institutions, like 
universities.  Finally, I would like to know what the university can leverage from its own 
operations to develop this idea, etc. 
 
Interviewer: That seems like a good starting point. Let’s start by analyzing the market.  
How would you do that? 
 
Interviewee: Ok, I will start by analyzing how many people go to university per year.  If 
the population grows at about 1% per year, this means that next year there could be more 
people attending universities than space available.  I would use a guesstimate of the 
percent of population enrolled in universities to calculate the number of students 
currently enrolled across Mexico.  For simplicity sake I will assume that all potential 
students attend universities in Mexico, excluding the percent that attends school abroad.  
 
Age range 
Population 
% Enrolled in 
University 
(guesstimate) 
Enrolled In 
University 
0-15 years old 
7 million 
0% 
0.0 million 
15-30 years old 
6 million 
25% 
1.5 million 
30-45 years old 
5 million 
2% 
0.1 million 
 
 
 
1.6 million 
 
There are roughly 6 million Mexicans between the ages of 15 and 30, and I would 
assume that they are evenly distributed.  That is, there are 400,000 people in each year of 
age (e.g. 400,000 people who are 15 years old, 400,000 people who are 16 years old, and 
so on until the age of 30).  If I assume that 25% of the people between the ages of 15 and 
30 go to university, that means we have 1.5 million students between the ages of 15 and 
30. 
 
Interviewer: Those assumptions seem to be very good ones.  What else would you need to 
consider? 
  
Interviewee: Ok, I think that I will need to figure out how many schools there are in 
Mexico and how many students are enrolled in each school. 
 
Interviewer: Sure, our client has told us that there are 200 universities in Mexico and we 
can assume there they are all at full capacity. 
 
Interviewee: Ok, so 1.6M divided by 200 means that there are 8,000 students at each 
school.  I might think that this seems like a high number.  In the United States we have 
part-time students and full-time students.  If this is similar in Mexico, the universities 
would likely be able to accommodate more students without any investment. 
 


===== PDF p9 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 5 - 
Interviewer: No, they can’t do that as the law prohibits it. 
 
Interviewee: Okay, so if the population grows at 1% per year and there are no new 
people going to university for other reasons (e.g. better economy) this means that in any 
given year we will have 1.6M multiplied by 1% new students.  We would have 16,000 
incremental students.  Given that we know the schools are at full capacity, we would 
need two new schools. 
 
Interviewer: Okay, so now let's focus on how would you segment the schools in order to 
think about the credit scoring they may have? 
 
Interviewee: I would segment them based on: 
 New school or just new branch to an existing school.  I believe that it is less risky to 
lend to a company that already has a business in place.   
 Flow of people to school: it's much more secure to lend to a school that has plenty of 
students in each year than to one that has the same number but distributed in a 
different way (e.g. most of the people finishing their careers and almost nobody in the 
first or second year). 
 Geography: We are speaking in averages.  There may be areas with no population 
growth.  There may be an uneven dispersion. 
 
Interviewer: How would you calculate how much money a typical school would need? 
 
Interviewee: There are two different streams of costs we have to consider.  On the one 
side the cost of building a new school – including buying the land, the construction, etc. – 
and the funds needed until the company reaches a state in which it has a positive free 
cash flow.   
 
Interviewer: Great.  Tell me the number, or at least how to get it. 
 
Interviewee: The better is to rely on our client experience.  He has 15 schools so there 
are some experiences we can leverage there? 
 
Interviewer: Let’s move on.  How would you fund this project? 
 
Interviewee: I will think about a couple different ideas such as:  
 Unilateral organizations (e.g. World Bank, etc.) 
 The Government as it may need to help some private schools that focus on careers 
that are not available through public university. 
 Banks: They may not be willing to do this on their own but may want to partner with 
someone that knows about this industry. 
 
Interviewer: Ok, fair enough.  Our client is asking you to summarize the situation.  What 
would be your recommendation? 


===== PDF p10 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 6 - 
 
Interviewee: Can I take a moment to recap all the findings? 
 
Interviewer: Sure. 
 
Interviewee: I will tell the client that it seems to be a pretty interesting opportunity to 
provide capital to build new schools which would be at least two per year given the 
growth in the population. 
 
 
 
 
