===== PDF p19 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
PROFIT IMPROVEMENT  
 
CANDY COMPANY 
 
 
Question: 
 
Your company is a rather successful producer of candy.  It originally started as a single product company and has 
diversified its product line over the last few years. The production process consists of two basic activities: 
manufacturing and packaging.  The firm has also expanded its sales through product line extensions.  Management 
is concerned that sales are growing, but profits are not increasing at the same rate.  What can your company do? 
 
 
Approach: 
 
This is revenue vs. cost exercise.  Margins are shrinking. 
 
Find out about the critical components of cost: raw material, labor and fixed cost.  Raw materials are commodities 
with cyclical prices, which have fallen in recent years but are expected to swing up again (this, as you have guessed, 
makes the problem worse.)  Labor and fixed capital has increased per unit over-proportionally compared with ten 
years ago.  Find out that the company’s controlling system is still focusing on the manufacturing part of the 
production and the cost explosion occurs in packaging (candy is candy, the product line extension is primarily an 
issue of different packaging.)  Controlling schedules manufacturing which is rather efficient already, but not 
packaging, thus causing slack in labor and fixed capital (small batch sizes, high setup times.) 
 
 
Solution: 
 
Possible solutions:  reduce product line, introduce controlling/scheduling measures for packaging. Qualifier: are the 
company’s customers (i.e. retailers) willing to accept the reduced product line? 
 
Find out about revenue killers:  concentration of retailers, trade brands, retailers demand large introductory discounts 
for new products, high failure rate of new products. 
 
Other good solutions:  streamline product line, reduce low margin trade brand production, emphasize pull 
marketing, and reduce introduction rate for new products. 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 45 
 
