===== PDF p145 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
141 
 
30. Global Health (BCG R2, Healthcare, New Market, Quantitative) 
Stem: Our client is an organization trying to incentivize pharma and biotech firms to develop treatments 
and vaccines for diseases that are prevalent in developing countries. Their challenge is to identify where 
to focus as there are many possible diseases. 
 
Interviewer: Please take a look at this graph. 
 
 
When asked, provide the following details: 
 
● 
DALY stands for Disability-Adjusted Life Year and is a measure of how much impact a disease 
has on peoples’ productivity. Diseases which cause people to die young or which cause disability 
starting in childhood have the highest DALY scores. 
● 
Pipeline indicates the number of drugs that are currently under development. 
● 
All these data are made up, as are some of the disease names. 
Interviewer: Which diseases represent the best opportunity for our client? 
 
Candidate: HIV and Hep represent the greatest disease burden for developing countries, but there are 
also many treatments already under development for these diseases, so our client probably doesn’t want 
to focus there. (Hard to incentivize more development, as the competition looks tough) It probably makes 
more sense to focus on the three diseases with the next-highest disease burden, TB, Malaria, and 
Diarrheal Disease. Of these, I would recommend focusing on Diarrheal disease as there are the fewest 
products in the pipeline. 
 
Interviewer: You’re right about diarrheal disease: that is where the client decided to focus. What does 
this tell us about diarrheal disease? Show candidate second graph. 


===== PDF p146 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
142 
 
 
 
When asked, provide the following details: 
 
● 
Etiology means the causes of the disease. 
● 
Antigen is a general term that can refer to anything which provokes an immune response, 
whether bacteria, virus, etc. 
● 
The Y-axis scale, incidence, indicates that 5% of cases are caused by Antigen A, and so forth. If 
someone adds up all the bars, he or she will realize that they don’t sum to 100%. This is because 
some cases are caused by antigens that have not yet been identified—so the picture is even 
worse… 
● 
Data are recent (last year) and the sample sizes are large: n=1500 for the local population data 
and n=256 for the military data. Subjects in the local population data are children under 18 years 
old. Subjects in the military data are soldiers of all ages. 
 
Candidate: It looks like diarrheal disease is not caused by a single primary antigen, but can be caused by 
a large number of different ones. I imagine this is kind of similar to the flu. Each year when I get a flu shot, 
there are different “strains” that it covers, and I might still get the flu if I catch a strain that wasn’t included. 
 
This means that developing a treatment or vaccine will be difficult because it can’t just attack one of the 
antigens, it will need to be effective across a large number of them. This helps explain why there are so 
few current treatments and vaccines available to treat diarrheal disease. 
 
Interviewer: Who do you think would be the main customers if we could encourage someone to produce 
a treatment or a vaccine for diarrheal disease? 
 
Candidates: Governments of the countries where this disease presents a major problem. Probably also 
some nonprofits who help provide healthcare in those areas: International organizations, such as the 
World Health Organization of the United Nations. 
 
Keep asking who else and provide hints until the candidate realizes that foreign tourists and the military 
would also provide significant sources of revenue for such a product. 


===== PDF p147 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
143 
 
Interviewer: What are some of the issues or risks that the drug maker would face with each of these 
customers? 
 
Candidates: Both governments and the military are attractive customers because they buy in large 
volumes, but because of that they have significant negotiating power. If the military decides not to buy, 
that single loss of a sale could cause the whole project to become unprofitable. The drug maker and the 
client should consider trying to set up pre-commitment contracts with the governments and the military. 
 
Interviewer: OK, take a look at this graph and assume that this is the prescribing data for a product like 
the one that our client may help launch for diarrheal disease. Assume that market 1 and market 2 are two 
different geographic markets. What does this show and which market seems like a better target? 
 
If the Candidate needs a little help with interpretation, the chart shows the physicians in each market 
arranged by their prescribing level of this product horizontally in descending order. So the physician who 
prescribes the most is on the left, and those who prescribe the least are on the right. The height of the 
line represents the cumulative total of all the units they have prescribed. 
 
Candidate: Market 1 is more consolidated than Market 2. 80% of the units of this product are prescribed 
by about a third of the physicians in Market 1, but in Market 2 to account for 80% of the units we have to 
include closer to 60% of the physicians. This means that it is probably easier to sell in Market 1 because 
fewer physicians would have to be informed about the new product, so I would be a better target. 
 
Interviewer: So, what is your recommendation? 
 
Any well thought out recommendation based on the data presented will be fine. 
