===== PDF p52 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
48 
 
Case 14: Eye Surgery 
 
OVERVIEW 
Firm:       BCG 
Round:    2006 FT, First 
Content:  Market sizing, qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a manufacturer of equipment for eye surgery.  Specifically, the machines measure 
deficiency in eyes, and the company also produces lasers for post-operational procedures and 
adjustments.  They don’t actually make the lasers or devices used for Lasik – rather, they are 
complementary products for this procedure. 
 
The global market for these devices is growing, but at a declining rate.  As a result, the client 
wants to get into a higher growth area, so they are looking at acquiring a company that makes 
inter-ocular devices.  These devices are used instead of Lasik but with similar effectiveness, and 
they are used for two major categories of patients: 
 
1 – patients with cataracts 
2 – refractive surgery (to correct near or far sightedness) 
 
How would you approach this opportunity?  What would you look at? 
 
Additional information provided during questioning 
 
Interviewee asked about the specifics of what the machines were so as to consider synergies 
between the two companies and product offerings.  There would be significant synergies and that 
is a component of answering the case. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
Recommended Approach 
Given that we’re looking at a company with an existing product line that is exploring moving 
into a related product line, we need to understand any links between the two.  It is vital that the 
interviewee demonstrates his acknowledgement of the risks of cannibalization and the benefits of 
synergy between the old and new lines.  Also key is to show an understanding of some of the 
basics of M&A.  High level, a framework looking into internal factors of both the target and 
acquirer (such as culture, finances, and the synergies there might be between the two), external 
factors such as market trends and competition, and customer factors (both doctors and patient 
segments) is necessary.  The interviewee should also remember the significance of the valuation 
of the target- is it worth the asking price. 
 
This case is fairly simple if you hit the numbers – take your time and get them right.  The overall 
framework was very helpful as interviewee was able to reference it multiple times during a fairly 


===== PDF p53 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
49 
 
focused case discussion.  The key is identifying that there will be different types of customers for 
each offering, so suggesting IDing customer segments up front seemed to be a major plus. 
 
Key Facts 
• US population is roughly 300M 
o 75% of the US population over 65 has cataracts 
o US population is evenly distributed over 80 years, the same number of people are 
each age 
o When someone turns 65, they have a 75% chance of getting cataracts, and if they 
don’t get it immediately they will never get it 
o 1/3 of the population is near-sighted and ¼ of the population is far-sighted-> 
175M people need vision correction of some kind 
• There are government caps on pricing for cataracts surgery and that there is substantial 
competition from major national players.   
• The refractive market is still very fragmented and growing rapidly – 1.5M surgeries/year 
will grow to 3-4M as procedures become safer.  Also, the patient pays 10x as much for 
refractive surgery as a cataracts patient would pay. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee:  I would look into internal factors of both the target and acquirer (such as culture, 
finances, and the synergies there might be between the two), external factors such as market 
trends and competition, and customer factors (both doctors and patient segments).  Related to all 
of these would be the valuation placed on the company.  If we could, I’d like to start with drilling 
down on the customers. 
 
Interviewer:  OK, I like that.  So let’s talk about the cataracts patients.  If I were to tell you that 
75% of the US population over 65 has cataracts, how many potential patients are we talking 
about? 
 
Interviewee:  Well I know that 12% of the population is 65+, so let’s call that 10% for 
simplicity.  10% of 300 million is 30 million.  75% of that is 22.5 million.  But some of those 
people might already have had surgery. 
 
Interviewer:  Good point.  And it gets a little dicey because the segment would be skewed 
towards 65.  So here is a simplifying assumption – assume the US population is evenly 
distributed over 80 years, the same number of people are each age.  When someone turns 65, 
they have a 75% chance of getting cataracts, and if they don’t get it immediately they will never 
get it.  What’s the market size thinking this way? 
 
Interviewee:  OK, so we have 300 million people over 80 years.  That’s 3.75 million people in 
each year age bucket.  So it would be 3.75 million people turning 65 every year.  If 75% of them 
get cataracts, that’s… roughly 2.9 people a year.  Plus some percentage of the population already 
over 65, I’m thinking right around 3 million people a year. 
 


===== PDF p54 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
50 
 
Interviewer:  Does that make sense? 
 
Interviewee:  I don’t know a lot about cataracts, but it seems to.  I’m not sure all of those people 
currently get laser eye surgery currently, though. 
 
Interviewer:  Right.  OK, now let’s turn our attention to the refractive surgery market.  So your 
research tells you that 1/3 of the population is near-sighted and ¼ of the population is far-
sighted.  Assume that those numbers already include those who’ve had their vision corrected.  
How many people are we talking about for the potential market size? 
 
Interviewer:  (Works out 4/12 + 3/12 = 7/12;  7/12 * 300 million people total = 175 [shortcut: 
1/4 of 100 = 25, * 7 = 175]) 175 million people. 
 
Interviewer:  Right.  And it turns out that it translates to 1.5 million people a year actually 
getting refractive surgery.  So if we acquire this company and can position it as a cataracts 
provider or a refractive surgery provider, which should we position it as?  (note: the machinery 
would be slightly different, enough so that it would be beneficial to go after one market or the 
other). 
 
Interviewee:  OK, so I know that the cataracts market is around 3 million a year and the 
refractive market is 1.5 million a year.  But I don’t know anything about profitability so I can’t 
really say.  Can you tell me a bit about the markets? 
 
Interviewer:  What do you want to know? 
 
(Key information: There are government caps on pricing for cataracts surgery and that there is 
substantial competition from major national players.  On the other hand, the refractive market is 
still very fragmented and growing rapidly – 1.5 will grow to 3-4 as procedures become safer.  
Also, the patient pays 10x as much for refractive surgery as a cataracts patient would pay). 
 
Interviewee:  So based on what we just discussed I’d like to target the refractive market. 
 
Interviewer:  Is there anything else you would want to know before making a decision to buy the 
company? 
 
Interviewee:  I’d need to know more about the financials to give a clear answer.  I’d also need to 
better understand the synergies and how they’d be perceived in the market.  However, it looks 
promising given our examination of the market segments. 
 
Interviewer:  Excellent. 
 
