===== PDF p93 =====
Business Type Cases (abbreviated answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
89 
Business Type Cases (abbreviated answers) 
 
A large food conglomerate (such as a Nabisco or Kraft) has a small plant in Maine that produces 
apple juice from one specific type of apple which is grown locally.  The apple juice is premium 
priced and positioned.  The company bought the plant from a local farmer cooperative a few 
years back with the hopes that the company could increase the plant’s capacity through better 
management.  The plant is currently operating at full capacity.  There was an accident at the plant 
recently where a worker broke his leg.  This incident prompted a review by OSHA (the govt. 
review agency in charge of occupational safety).  OSHA has informed the company that an 
additional $2 million investment is needed to bring the plant up to current safety standards.  You 
have been hired by the company to help it decide what it should do.  Specifically, you need to 
provide your client with a list of options and then identify the one that you recommend. 
 
Additional information provided (if interviewee asks probing questions): 
 
!"The apple juice product is breaking even for the company. 
!"There are several other premium apple juice brands.  The competition is stiff. 
!"There is a raw material constraint (there is a limited number of this specific kind of apple 
which is grown each year).  
!"The demand for the apple juice is strong.  Consumer demand is only limited by the 
availability of supply.  The strength of the demand stems from the uniqueness of the product 
(that special kind of apple). 
!"Producing a concentrate for the juice will not work for this plant (too costly to convert 
machinery and this specific kind of apple does not lend well to such a use).  In other words, 
you cannot grow more apples or stretch more out of the current supply. 
!"The company’s competitive advantage is its marketing expertise and distribution system. 
 
One Approach: 
 
After asking several questions to get more information, I outlined the following options: 1) get 
out/ sell, 2) status quo approach (invest minimum necessary to meet govt.  standards/do nothing), 
3) gung-ho approach (invest above minimum level in both the facility and the human resources).  
It is important to list all possible options in an effort to be thorough, rather than to just identify 
one or two of the more viable alternatives.  Then, I identified the stakeholders in this decision 
(the farmers, customers, company, local community, U.S. govt. regulators, and competitors) and 
discussed the advantages and disadvantages of each option for each of the stakeholders.  In this 
question, the company is also asking itself, ‘what is my internal rate of return?’ (or are my funds 
put to a better use elsewhere in the organization).  With this question in mind (and the fact that 
there is a resource constraint and the product is just breaking even), the company should get 
out/sell the plant.  However, this option also has public relations implications (layoffs, bad PR 
because of the accident, news could leak that the company didn’t have the best safety standards, 
etc.).  The best option is to sell the plant to the farm cooperative or work out some joint-
partnership agreement with them. 
 
The Official Approach: 
 
There are three main options: 


===== PDF p94 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
90 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
1) walk away (shut down the plant or sell it) 
2) invest more money into the plant 
3) arrange a partnership agreement with the local farmer’s cooperative who originally sold the 
plant to your client which would place the plant operations in the hands of the farmers while 
the company would market and distribute the apple juice.  This is the approach that should be 
recommended to the client. 
 
 
 
Additional note from the student: 
This case is very unique.  It serves a good purpose – which is to get the student to answer the 
question that is directly being asked (“what are my options, etc.?”) and, to use the biggest 
consulting cliché of all, to “think out of the box,” rather than fall into a safe case framework.  
The successful individual will probe for more relevant information and assess the situation by 
developing his or her own framework that is unique to the question at hand.  The traditional 
frameworks serve as a good starting point, but don’t be locked into them. 
