===== PDF p62 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
58 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Easy 
Company: OC&C Strategy 
 
9.17 Vitamins Retailer 
 
Part 1: Context 
Our client is a leading specialist vitamins retailer, directly operating 
c.500 stores in the UK. Their products include vitamins, minerals 
and supplements, all sold as pills in bottle format (for the sake of 
simplicity). 
Part 2: Market Sizing and Growth Drivers 
Question 2a: How large is the UK vitamins market? (i.e. total 
annual spend on vitamins) 
Answer 2a: A good answer will introduce two possible approaches 
(bottom-up and top-down) and discuss benefits/drawbacks of 
each. One solid approach would be bottom-up starting with the UK 
population and based on average spend,  segmented  by age 
bracket. You should make sensible assumptions around 
penetration & volume consumed by age bracket and support your 
assumptions with a clear rationale. 
1) Introduce approach 
• Market Size = Number of People (by age bracket) * Penetration 
rate * Annual spend per person 
• Specify differences in both inputs by client segment 
2) Analyse each input separately 
• Number of people: start with the total UK population and break 
into sensible brackets with similar consumption levels 
• Penetration rate: explain rationale behind your assumptions 
and why the penetration levels are different across the age 
brackets 
• Annual spend: keep it simple and be practical. Think about the 
fact that vitamin is typically sold in bottles that can last several 
months, meaning that this is not a monthly purchase, making   an 
annual spend the better metric to use here (as opposed to 
monthly) 
Example calculation shown in Exhibit 1, resulting in a £1bn UK 
market. 
Question 2b: Let us assume that the UK vitamins market is £1bn, 
what are its underpinning growth drivers? Moreover, do you 
believe that this market will grow in the future? 
Answer 2b: A good approach is to structure the growth drivers   in 
line with the metrics used to size the market in the previous 
question 
• Ageing population means will shift the weight to the higher 
spenders therefore driving the market size up 
• Greater public awareness about the benefits of vitamins and 
supplements is likely to drive up penetration across all age groups 
• More government campaigns about nutritional requirements is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarly likely to drive higher consumption 
• Product innovation, such as the introduction of multi-vitamins, 
is likely to drive consumption 
» (bonus) worth flagging that new products can drive high 
adoption at first, but may just be a temporary fad 
• The rise in specialist diets can drive higher penetration levels 
and spend (e.g. supplements for people on a free-from/vegan diet 
or with intolerances) 
• (bonus) Increased availability of products as they are 
accessible via more retail channels, such as grocers, online and 
D2C subscription services 
Part 3: Product Margins 
Question 3a: The client sells both branded products and own- 
label products. Which are more attractive to sell from a margin 
perspective? 
Answer 3a: Here you should break down the product economics 
and highlight the differences between the two product types. 
The own-label products will be cheaper to sell, but substantially 
cheaper to purchase (because there are many potential suppliers 
relative to branded products). The branded sellers may be able to 
exhibit supplier power. 
(Bonus) When thinking about price promotion, the Client has more 
control on depth of promotion for own-label products but on the 
downside, the investment in promotion has to be fully covered (i.e. 
not shared with the brand). 
(Second Level Bonus) You can ask if the Client manufactures their 
own-label products, and if they do then their margins are higher 
than on branded products because the Client captures both the 
RSP and MSP, as opposed to losing the MSP to the manufacturer 
of branded products. 
Part 4: Investment Thesis 
Question 4a: Given what we have learnt about the market, and by 
looking at below two charts on the channel shift & our client’s 
revenues, would you invest in this business? Why? 
 
 
Answer 4a: This is a very attractive business due to several 
reasons, which you should be able to derive following a logical 
framework far 
1) Is the market attractive? 
• Yes, as established in Part 3, the market is growing 
2) Is it aligned with channel trends? 
• Mostly yes, using Exhibit 2 the specialist retailer channel mix 
appears stable 
• (Bonus) Another good point to add here is that the threat from 
online might be a concern in the future, therefore the business 


===== PDF p63 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be prepared to expand their offer online if the market starts 
to shift in that direction 
3) Is the business well positioned with consumers? 
• Yes, the Client is clearly to dominant player in this market. From 
Exhibits 2 and 3, you can derive the Clients’ market share (18-
20%) 
4) Is the business growing? 
• Yes, you should first note from Exhibit 3 that Clients’ revenues 
have consistently grown over the past 5 years, and from Exhibits 2 
& 3 that their growth was far ahead of market growth (11% vs 4%) 
Question  4b:  As  the  new  owner,  how  would  you  grow  this 
business? 
Answer 4b: Here, you should come up with several ideas to grow 
the business and elaborate on each. These questions are often to 
test your creativity rather than focusing on a particularly clever 
structure. Some examples are: 
• Introduce new products and new formats (e.g. different size of 
bottles, new vitamin mix) 
• Rollout more stores in the UK with similar catchment 
characteristics to strong performing existing stores 
• Introduce online sales via own website. (Bonus) Discuss that 
this is a pre-emptive move in the face of Amazon and online pure 
plays entering this category 
• Introduce products in adjacent categories to drive basket size 
(e.g. healthy snacking, natural beauty products) 
• Introduce a subscription scheme 
• Expand to attractive international markets with similar 
characteristics to the UK. This can be by opening own stores, 
franchising stores, and/or wholesales to local retailers. Conditions 
for market selection include: 
o Large and growing vitamins market 
o Similar consumption per capita & comparable consumer 
attitude to vitamins 
o Similar competitive landscape 
o Easy product compliance processes (no import challenges) 
o No regulatory challenges (e.g. do not enter countries where 
vitamins are only sold at pharmacies by law) 


===== PDF p64 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT 1: ANSWER TO PART 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT 2: VITAMINS MARKET BY CHANNEL (£BN), 2012-16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT 3: CLIENT REVENUE (£M), 2012-16 
 
