===== PDF p91 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
87 
 
Our client is the association of New England ski resorts. It is 1985, and profitability of member 
resorts has been going down for two years. The association has hired us (1) to find out why and 
(2) to recommend what to do about it. 
 
I would like to begin with the profitability equation to try to determine where the problem is, 
then drill down to look for its causes and figure out what to do about it. Let’s begin with the 
revenue side. Has the average price of lift tickets gone down? 
 
!"No. 
 
Has the number of skiers gone down? 
 
!"Yes. It’s plummeted over the last two years. 
 
Well that seems to be the problem, then, but before I go into the details I just want to check the 
cost side to make sure that nothing has changed there. Have fixed or variable costs gone up over 
the last two years? 
 
!"No. 
 
Let’s go back to the declining number of skiers. I think the first thing is to figure out why the 
number of skiers is going down, then make some suggestions about what to do about it. There 
could be demand-side or supply-side reasons why the number of skiers at New England resorts is 
going down. On the demand side, people could be skiing elsewhere; or they could be doing other 
kinds of recreation instead, like going to the Caribbean; or they could be cutting back on 
recreational activities. On the supply side, some external factor like two years of warm weather 
could be causing fewer people to ski. 
 
!"The weather has been fine, so how would you determine why the number of skiers was 
going down? 
 
We could look at trends in ticket sales at ski resorts outside New England: if sales are going up 
elsewhere, then perhaps people who were going skiing in New England are now going to the 
Rockies or Europe; if sales are going down elsewhere, then it may signal that skiing is becoming 
less popular nationwide. Resorts themselves would probably not share this information with us, 
but there may be other organizations like our client that aggregate such information. To check 
any inferences that we made from these data, we would want to talk with people and ask them 
why they were no longer skiing in New England. 
 
!"How would you find people who used to ski in New England but no longer do? 
 
Probably the easiest way is to rent mailing lists from ski magazines, focusing on subscribers who 
live in New England or New York, and do a telephone or mail survey. In the survey, I would ask 
people how often they ski in New England, how often they ski elsewhere, how often they do 
other recreational activities like go to the beach, and whether they had changed those habits over 
the last two years. 


===== PDF p92 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
88 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
!"Good. Say you find out that skiing is as popular as ever, but that more people are now 
going out west instead of skiing in New England. What do you think could cause a shift 
like that? 
 
The four main costs of going on a ski vacation are equipment, transportation, lodging, and lift 
tickets. I would say that equipment, lodging, and lift tickets are more or less the same in the 
Rockies and in New England. But someone living in New York or New England will have to fly 
out west, which is a lot more expensive than driving up to Vermont. That suggests two 
possibilities: either a raging economy is making people feel wealthier, so they’re willing to pay 
more and fly out west, or (more likely) airlines have cut their fares, meaning that people would 
be paying a smaller premium to go out west. 
 
!"That’s exactly what happened. What would you do about it? 
 
I would want to look at ways to drive the number of skiers or the revenue per skier back up, or 
drive costs down. We might be able to drive the number of skiers back up by reducing prices, 
offering regional passes, or offering additional services like a more comprehensive resort 
experience. Or we might be able to drive the revenue per skier up by increasing prices or adding 
on lodging, equipment sales, etc. 
 
!"How important do you think the skiers will be to improving profitability at these resorts? 
 
I think they’ll be very important, unless we can drive costs down substantially. 
 
!"What do you think the cost structure of a ski mountain is like? 
 
I would guess that it is almost all fixed costs: the mountain, lifts, ski patrol, snowmaking, etc.—
you have to have to pay for all that whether you have 20,000 or 2,000 skiers in a day. So variable 
costs will be a very small portion of the total. 
 
!"True. Can you think of any other ways to recover those fixed costs? 
 
Uh… 
 
!"Right now you’re only spreading your fixed costs over three or four months of the year, 
when people are skiing. What about the rest of the year? 
 
Aha! This must have been when ski resorts started building golf courses, water slides, and so 
forth, so that they could get some revenue during the summer months as well. 
 
!"Exactly.
