===== PDF p51 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
47 
 
 
Difficulty: Easy 
Quant: Medium 
Company: Strategy& 
 
 
9.11 Toy manufacturer 
 
Your client is the third largest toy manufacturer in Europe and has 
come to you because their sales have been stagnant or even 
declining during the last few years. Sales had been rising before. 
Why are sales like this? How can the client improve the situation? 
Which elements would you like to analyze? 
 
Information to be given as a response to student inquiries: 
• Company is selling traditional toys 
• Company segments their market into: pre-school (0-6 years), 
girls’ toys and boys’ toys 
• Highest volume products are: plastic toys, dolls and vehicles + 
action figures 
• Industry growth has been flat 
• Profit margin is ten to fifteen percent 
• Production takes place in Asia 
• Company has subsidiaries in main European markets, 
responsible for sales in these markets. The sales force visits 
the distributors of the toys, which are mainly supermarkets and 
department stores on the one hand and dedicated toy shops 
on the other hand 
• Brand image of client is good 
 
Question asked: 
Suppose you are in a meeting with this client and the question 
arises as to how large the toy market really is in Belgium? How 
would you determine this? 
 
Suggested answer: 
Let’s say that we consider mainly (for this client) the market of 0-14 
year old children. There are 10 million people in Belgium, which 
translates into about 3 million households if you take an average 
of 3 people per household. Not all households have children, and 
some have more than one, and so I guessed that there would be 
about 0.5 children on average in this age category per household, 
so 1.5 million children. 
 
Then I looked at the gifts they receive and started to enumerate 
important occasions children at that age get presents from their 
parents: birthday, Christmas, beginning and end of school, and 
maybe one more occasion, which gives 5 in total. Then I said that 
each time the parents would spend 50 Euros on average. So this 
means that each child receives toys for an amount of about 250 
Euros per year. I then multiplied the 250 Euros with the 1.5 million 
children to find my estimate for the toy market in Belgium of about 
375 million Euros. 
 
What would you think could be a reason of the stagnant sales 
of the client? Suggested answer: 
The first one that comes to mind is that the client is not strong    in 
the electronic game business, which has been the fastest growing 
segment over the last decade in the toy industry. The client should 
consider one of three options: either grow their electronics 
business themselves, or buy a company that already is 
specialized in electronic games, or else form a partnership with 
such a firm. 
