===== PDF p57 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 54 
 
Case 25: Blockbuster Store 
Company: Oliver Wyman 
 
After you graduate from McCombs you want to start a Blockbuster video rental franchise. The store 
should be opened within the US. How will you go about deciding the location for the store? 
 
Sample Discussion:  
 
Candidate: A step by step method can be deployed to arrive at some options. 
 
Step 1: The store should be located in a city or town or suburb that has a large pool of the type of 
customers we intend to target. 
Step 2: Once we have a few options, we need to evaluate the competitive situation in those selected 
areas. 
Step 3: In areas we are sure we can compete, the cost of operation has to be considered. For 
example: In some areas the real estate value can be high and some it can be low. 
Step 4: Of the locations chosen, ones that can be accessed easily by the customers will be preferred. 
 
The above steps will help one narrow down on very few choices from which the best location suited 
to conducting business can be selected. 
 
Interviewer: Great. So how would you decide what types of customers to target? What are the 
different ways to segment customers? 
 
Candidate: Customers can be segmented by age, gender, income levels, movie habits, occupation, 
marital status, family size etc 
 
Interviewer: What type of customers you would target? 
 
Candidate: Well – people who have a lot of free time are the ones who will watch movies at home. 
Typically these are housewives, students and people retired from work. Also kids watch animation 
and cartoon movies a lot. Of these segments the ones that have more money at their disposal are the 
ones who are likely to rent videos.  
 
Interviewer: Let us say you have identified 10 such markets where there are a large number of 
customers that you are looking for. What do you do next? 
 
Candidate: I will try to find the number and type of competitors in those markets and also 
understand their business model and service levels. That will help me understand who I can compete 
with and who I cannot. Also it will help me understand the gaps in service levels which can be crucial 
in the decision to open a store in a particular location. 
 
Interviewer: What kind of gaps do you think may exist? 
 


===== PDF p58 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 55 
 
Candidate: Say the store is not easily accessible to many customers who may have to drive a long 
distance to reach a rental store. Or a store could be small and stock only a few copies of new movies 
resulting in waiting lists – This means the demand is more than supply and there is an opportunity for 
a new store.  
Interviewer: You also mentioned about cost of operations. Can you explain a bit more about that? 
 
Candidate: The major costs in a retail set up are real estate costs, store maintenance costs, labor 
costs, and promotion. These costs will have to lower. It is not necessary that I will choose the 
locations with the lowest cost. The costs have to be optimum for the demand levels anticipated. 
 
The case can build beyond this with more questions. But the interviewer was more interested in 
understanding the candidate’s ability to break a simple problem down into simple steps without 
putting pen to paper 
