===== PDF p83 =====
© 2012 NYU Stern MCA – All Rights Reserved 
Case 12: Starbucks and Ice Cream 
Our client is Starbucks. Starbucks has had no growth and is facing competition from Dunkin Donuts, which has partnered with Baskin Robbins 
at many of its locations.  Do you think that Starbucks should add ice cream to retail stores? Please also explore other growth opportunities 
for Starbucks. 
This is a very high-level strategy case in which the candidate is expected to evaluate a new idea for the client. It is important to assess the many 
impacts the introduction of this product will have in Starbucks’ strategy and operations. Additionally, the candidate should be evaluated based on 
creativity and organization to propose new alternatives for the firm. The candidate must form hypotheses along the way as information is relayed 
from the interviewer to the candidate. 
 
A superior candidate will be able to use his/her framework in a structured manner to determine whether ice cream should be added. This 
discussion should go beyond revenue and cost (i.e. brand identity, operational issues, etc.).  
Case Prompt 
(to be read to the candidate) 
79 
Interviewer Guide 
• Candidate Led 
• Product Expansion 
• Food Services industry 
Easy  
Normal 
Hard 


===== PDF p84 =====
© 2012 NYU Stern MCA – All Rights Reserved 
80 
Case 12: Starbucks and Ice Cream 
Continued… (page 2 of 4) 
Sample Discussion 
(to be relayed by candidate when discussing framework) 
Starbuck’s Value Proposition 
Customers 
• How are the customers at Starbucks different from customers at 
Dunkin Donuts? 
• Starbucks: higher end clients who appreciate the coffee 
and the ambience the stores provide 
• Dunkin Donuts: lower income group and coffee on-the-go 
• Who eats ice cream? 
• Heavily consumed by children 
• What differentiates Starbucks? 
• Atmosphere generated by the large stores and 
comfortable chairs (this is as important as the coffee) 
• High quality coffee 
• Extreme customization of products 
• High quality customer service  
Operational Issues 
Business Issues 
• A large number of kids in a store would damage Starbucks’ 
most recognizable quality, the ambience it provides 
• Starbucks’ high margin product lines in frozen drinks and baked 
goods would be affected by the introduction of ice cream 
leading to possible cannibalization of profits 
• Finding and dealing with a new supplier 
• Current stores are not equipped to store ice cream with freezers 
which would require major renovations, and could mean a 
smaller seating area 
• Baristas would need to learn new processes for handling ice 
cream 
Initial recommendation (candidate should summarize in 30 seconds): Starbucks should not sell ice cream in its 
stores because of potential cannibalization, conflicts with its current business model, and the need for major 
operational changes 


===== PDF p85 =====
© 2012 NYU Stern MCA – All Rights Reserved 
81 
Case 12: Starbucks and Ice Cream 
Continued… (page 3 of 4) 
Sample Discussion 
(to be relayed by candidate when discussing framework) 
Expansion into new areas 
Introduction of new products 
• Introduce a non-specialty coffee (Starbucks has now done this 
with Pike Place Roast) as a special offer during tough economic 
times to compete with Dunking Donuts  
• Begin selling Starbucks ice cream in retail channels (this is 
already being done) 
• Additional suburban areas, slightly further semi-rural areas 
• Selective cities internationally 
Key Takeaway:  Starbucks has some additional alternatives to explore growth that will fit its value proposition and 
leverage the competencies it has developed over time 
Interviewer should keep probing candidate for more alternatives for growth for Starbucks.  


===== PDF p86 =====
© 2012 NYU Stern MCA – All Rights Reserved 
• Given the conflicting target market, potential cannibalization and major operational 
challenges between Starbucks’ business model and ice cream selling, it is not recommended 
that it starts selling this product in its stores 
• Next steps include: 
• Analyzing the other suggested growth opportunities, and pick one or two that 
would meet Starbucks model 
• Devise how these new alternatives would solve Starbuck’s growth problem as well 
as help the company fight the competitors’ strategic move 
• There is a risk the market migrates towards selling ice cream in cafes 
• The new alternatives may not be enough to set Starbucks back on the growth track (not big 
enough, not profitable enough, or simply to not meet their expectations) 
• Starbucks’ growth issue is beyond new products and rest on more structural problems 
(excess of stores, growing lines and increasing costs of customization) 
82 
Sample Conclusions & Recommendations 
Case 12: Starbucks and Ice Cream 
Continued… (page 4 of 4) 
Recommendations 
Risks 
