===== PDF p16 =====
Table of Contents 
 
12
Practice Case 5: Aerosol can manufacturer  
(Bain Round 2) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:   
 
Your client is an aerosol can manufacturer. They buy sheet steel, cut 
it into shape, paint it, weld it into a cylinder, apply a top and bottom 
and then sell them to their customers. They do not fill the can. Over 
the last 5 years their sales have increased from 80M to 120M, but 
their profits have decreased from+10M to -40M. They want to know 
what they should do. 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:   
 
• 
Depreciation costs are the same and there has been no additional fixed 
asset expenditure. 
• 
We have seen a steep increase in labor cost. The increases account for 
about a third of the total cost increase. 
• 
Their pricing basis is Steel price + Value added, so they automatically 
pass on all cost increases/savings to their customers.  
• 
5 years ago the average price we get for a can is 1p and now it is 3p. 
What does it mean? 
• 
The costs of paint have increased by 40M over the last 5 years. 
• 
Painting is a capacity limiting step.  
• 
Company is foregoing additional sales ñ and have an opportunity cost 
associated with this, but that hits the top line, not the bottom line.  
• 
Our customer requirements have changed: they are demanding higher 
quality. 
• 
Historically we sold 40% to industrial clients, 30% into household 
applications and 30% into consumer packaged goods. This has now 
changed to 20/30/50. 
• 
For industrial clients we used stickers rather than paint. 
 
III. Sample solution: 
 
The cost basis increased by 90M over the last 5 years and I will started by 
looking at why these costs may had increased.  
 
The reason our client is loosing money is their shift to the higher priced 
consumer segment. The additional quality requirements in this segment, in 
particularly on the painting side, have limited our capacity and increased our 
cost basis. Over the next weeks my team is going to look at: costs and 
benefits of capacity addition, Outsourcing the painting to a 3rd party and 
growing their industrial part of the business again. 
