===== PDF p12 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
8
2. Botox                                                                                 ____ 
Type of Case: Business expansion/ New product launch  
Difficulty: Low  
   
Opening  
   
The maker of Botox is considering expanding to the migraine market and has already begun 
clinical trials in this arena. The product is scheduled to launch in 2010. What is your estimate for 
the size of the migraine market and the potential revenue?  
   
Background  
   
The product is given in the form of an injection every 2 months. It offers similar efficacy 
compared to existing options but without any side effects. When given for migraines it does have 
some of the added skin care benefits it is commonly associated with  
   
Analysis  
   
Sizing the market:  
•       Population  
•       % of population diagnosed with migraines  
•       % treated with OTC (over the counter) vs. prescription medications  
•       % that have severe migraines  
•       Expected share for the product  
   
Because the product requires an injection versus the current oral medication it requires more 
hassle and thus will most likely be reserved for the most severe of patients. When moving to 
revenue the interviewee should discuss potential issues involved in pricing such as:  
•       Insurance coverage  
•       Patients’ willingness to pay more than they currently are  
•       Inconvenience of MD visits for injections  
•       Skin care benefits from Botox  
•       The market leader in traditional prescription migraine treatments, Immitrex, lost 
patent protection in December and thus there will be very cheap alternatives available in 
the market. This should be mostly bonus points but the interviewee could raise the issue 
of generic competition for existing products or ask if generics exist.  
Ultimately, the interviewer states that the client is going to price the drug at $200 per injection. 
Therefore the therapy costs $1200 per year and that is multiplied by the expected number of 
patients that will receive Botox for migraines to get the annual revenue estimate.  
   
Additional question: How might the launch of Botox for migraines affect their existing business 
in plastic surgery and should the client launch under a separate brand name in the migraine 
market?  


===== PDF p13 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
9
Recommendation  
   
Launching under the same brand name could cause a public outcry over the discrepancy in price 
between the migraine version and the plastic surgery version given they are the identical drug. 
Also, it could cause some patients to use the migraine form instead of buying the plastic surgery 
version, thus cannibalizing some of the existing sales of Botox. On the other hand, keeping the 
Botox brand name brings with it the strong reputation Botox has already built through its current 
use.  
   
Launching under another brand name would allow the client to more effectively differentiate 
between the two uses when advertising the product to consumers and physicians. It would also 
likely lessen the backlash from the differential pricing.  
