===== PDF p7 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
3 
 
Case 1: Bank Increasing Market Share 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm: N/A 
Round: 2005 Summer, First 
Content: Mainly qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a major diversified financial services firm. They have 4 lines of business: 
 
• Checking Accounts 
• Savings Accounts 
• Loans 
• Mortgages 
 
The bank is profitable, but the CEO is on a mission to increase overall market share while still 
maintaining profitability.  He is considering increasing his sales force to accomplish this.  
 
There are 3 different categories of sales force he can choose to change: 
 
• Branch Managers 
• Telemarketers 
• Mortgage Agents 
 
The CEO has come to us for advice on whether or not he should increase his sales staff, and if 
so, where he should be adding heads.  How would you go about addressing this question? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: 
A thoughtful and complete answer to this case involves discussing the overall market 
environment, with a look at the competition in the marketplace and the current market share 
breakdown. The interviewee should realize that there are 4 separate markets for distinct products 
that have different profitability characteristics.  It becomes apparent that investing in some lines 
of business will pay off for the company more than investing in others.  From there, a discussion 
of the economics of each of the different sales channels will drive you towards a 
recommendation. 
 
1. Determine the competitive position of the company 
• What is the competitive position of the company in the overall market? 
2. Assess the importance of the different lines of business 
• Where does the bank play?  What is its strategy?  How does it make its money? 
 


===== PDF p8 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
4 
 
• What is our market share in each line? 
• What is the importance of each line to the overall business?  How do the different 
lines fit into the overall strategy?  Which are the most profitable?  Are there any loss 
leaders?   
• What can the company expect to achieve from investment in each line? 
3. Understand the impact of the different categories of sales force  
• Which lines of business will be affected by increased investment in each category?   
• What is the expected ROI for each category? 
4. Formulate an investment strategy for the bank to follow 
 
Key facts: 
• The market is made up of 5 major players. They are all very similar, offering 
diversified services and playing in all 4 segments.  
• Market share is defined on a % of customers basis.  The market shares are as follows 
– the #1 player has 20% market share. We are the #2 player and have an 18% market 
share. The rest of the industry is somewhere between 15%-18%.  
• The market share within each of the segments does not break down in this same 
fashion. Everyone is profitable and established and no one is pricing their products 
irrationally. 
• The company’s share by segment is as follows: 
o Checking Accounts – 21% 
o Business Accounts – 20% 
o Loans – 23% 
o Mortgages – 10% 
• Profit per transaction is as follows: 
o Checking Accounts - $5 
o Business Accounts - $20 
o Loans - $100 
o Mortgages - $1,000 


===== PDF p9 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
5 
 
Sales Force Profitability
0
50
100
150
200
250
Branch Managers
Mortgage Agents
Telemarketer
Sales Category
Profitability
Existing Customers
New Business
 
Editor’s note: The chart above depicts the profitability of different types of sales agents with 
regard to the mortgage business. “Profitability” of each individual sales agent is defined as the 
incremental $ profit margin (in $K) each brings in.  Telemarketers clearly bring in the most 
profit margin $s in aggregate, but mortgage agents bring in the most from new business.    
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: Before we start, I would like to clarify what a mortgage agent actually does. Can 
you walk me through that? 
 
Interviewer: The mortgage agents work by having relationships with real estate brokers. When a 
broker makes a sale, he refers the buyer of the home to a mortgage agent. That agent works with 
the home buyer to close the transaction and sell the mortgage. 
 
Interviewee:  That makes sense. I’d like to figure out what the current market situation looks 
like. How many players are there and what is the breakdown in terms of market share?  Is 
everyone profitable?  Are there any new players?  Any new trends like internet banking? 
 
Interviewer: The market is made up of 5 major players. They are all very similar, offering 
diversified services and playing in all 4 segments. The market shares are as follows – the #1 
player has 20% market share. We are the #2 player and have an 18% market share. The rest of 
the industry is somewhere between 15%-18%. However, the market share within each of the 
segments does not break down in this same fashion. Everyone is profitable and established and 
no one is pricing their products irrationally. There are some new trends emerging such as 
internet banking, but they are not a factor at this point, and the CEO is not worried about that. 
 
Interviewee: I see. Do we know how our market share breaks down in each of the different 
segments? 


===== PDF p10 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
6 
 
 
Interviewer: Yes, we do. Our breakdown by segment is as follows: 
 
• Checking Accounts – 21% 
• Business Accounts – 20% 
• Loans – 23% 
• Mortgages – 10% 
 
Interviewee: That is interesting. Is there a different profitability level for each of the different 
segments? 
 
Interviewer: Yes, there is. As a matter of fact, profitability per transaction is as follows: 
 
• Checking Accounts - $5 
• Business Accounts - $20 
• Loans - $100 
• Mortgages - $1,000 
 
Interviewee: I would like to explore a few more possibilities, but first, I want to just say that 
my gut instinct is that we can increase our sales force, and I think that we should do it in the 
mortgage agent area.  
 
Interviewer: That is a good insight. Why do you think that is? 
 
Interviewee: Based on the existing market shares, it seems like we have the most room to 
improve our business in this area.  Additionally, given the parity between the competitors in the 
industry overall, I think it would be very difficult to dramatically increase share in any of the 
other areas. Therefore, we should concentrate on the mortgage market. From there, we need to 
see what part of the sales force will have the greatest impact on this market. Do we have any 
information on the profitability of each of the salespeople and how much new business each arm 
brings in? 
 
Interviewer: Yes, the CEO has given us this exhibit: 
 


===== PDF p11 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
7 
 
Sales Force Profitability
0
50
100
150
200
250
Branch Managers
Mortgage Agents
Telemarketer
Sales Category
Profitability
Existing Customers
New Business
 
 
Interviewer: What does this chart tell you? 
 
Interviewee: This shows that telemarketers are the most profitable place to put our money in 
terms of increasing our sales force. How are they generating these profits?  What are they 
actually doing? 
 
Interviewer: They call up existing customers to get them to renew their old services. 
 
Interviewee: I see. In that case, it looks like my initial hunch was correct. Since the other 2 
sales forces will increase profits based on existing customers, the mortgage agent is where we 
can drive market share growth by winning new customers. In terms of making an overall profit, 
the telemarketers would be the right way to go. However, since the CEO has explicitly stated that 
he wants to increase market share, mortgage agents are where he should be bulking up the sales 
force. 
 
Interviewer: Thank you. Out of curiosity, can you give me an example of where adding branch 
managers might be a good decision?  What would you need to look at? 
 
Interviewee: We could do a study of each branch to see how many customers come through the 
door and how many of them are existing customers versus potential new customers. 
 
Interviewer: OK. Let’s say we did that and we found out that in each store, there are 4 branch 
managers and they, on average, service 40 potential new customers that come through the door 
everyday. What would you have to look at when deciding whether or not to add more branch 
managers? 
 


===== PDF p12 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
8 
 
Interviewee: I think you would have to look at whether or not the existing 4 managers can 
handle 10 new customers per day. If they can handle that amount of customers, then there is no 
need for more managers. In that situation, if we were to add a 5th manager, each manager would 
then be responsible for 8 new customers on average, but that would just create idle time and not 
generate any new customers. If however, there are long waiting times and potential new 
customers are getting fed up and leaving, then perhaps adding new managers would make sense. 
 
Interviewer: What else could change that could cause the bank to want to add more branch 
managers? 
 
Interviewee: If you can drive additional potential customers through the door. Perhaps a 
changing trend in the market will create a new opportunity, i.e. adding a new product that may 
draw in more non-customers who are interested in becoming a customer or a new advertising 
campaign that is drawing in more people. In any of those types of scenarios, it may make sense 
to add additional branch managers. 
 
Interviewer: I think that makes a lot of sense. Thank you very much. 
