===== PDF p198 =====
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
Difficulty: Very Hard
Industry: Education
Case Type: Strategy Formulation
Written by Daniel Krimowski ‘21 and Anthony Villamagna ‘21
Concepts Tested
Case #21 : Pay Me My Money, In Cash
• Endurance
• Creativity
• Demeanor
COVID has fundamentally changed the MBA experience for students. Classes are mostly remote, travel has been 
eliminated, and the students are not happy. However, Columbia Business School (CBS) is still charging the same tuition as 
before COVID. Our client is a group of CBS students who feel that they are not getting the full value of their MBA. 
In the view of our clients, the MBA is as much about the relationships built with classmates and the experiences gained as 
it is about the education. Some of our client’s were even placed on probation by the school for traveling. They are 
extremely unhappy. How do we approach pressuring the school into giving our clients a tuition reduction?
Problem Statement Narrative
This is a candidate-led case that is an exercise in futility. There isn’t any viable path forward and every path they pursue is a 
red herring with no chance of success at the end. Offer the answers to the clarifying questions when asked throughout the 
case. Give the prompts when candidate asks about a particular subject and let them brainstorm and work the problem 
before informing them that the option is impossible. The test is if they continue to attack each new problem with energy 
and do not visibly show their frustration. Do NOT help them at any point in the case
Case Notes
194


===== PDF p199 =====
•What do we want to accomplish? 
“Our clients want at least 20% of tuition refunded or reduced, removal of the character probation they received, 
and an apology from the school for putting them on probation. These demands are absolute and non-negotiable.”
•Who is the decision-maker on reducing tuition?
“Decisions on tuition reduction, removal of probation, and issuing an official apology are all made by the Office of 
the President of Columbia University.” 
•Is there any particular time this needs to be accomplished by?
“Since most of the students are in their 2nd year, they would like their refund before tuition is due at the end of 
January in the Spring Semester”
•What do the students intend to with the refund?
“We don’t have any information around that”
•Does the school have a history of giving tuition refunds?
“No”
•How does this year’s tuition compare with last year’s?
“The school announced a tuition freeze last Spring Semester. It is the same as the year before”
•How much is tuition?
“75k per year”
•Can you tell me more about the coalition of students?
“Due to confidentiality, we can provide no details beyond that the client is a coalition of like-minded students.”
•Has the school responded to their initial demands?
“Yes, Columbia University announced there will be no refunds”
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
Clarifying Questions
Question #1 / Framework 
How do we approach pressuring the school into giving our clients a tuition reduction?
195


===== PDF p200 =====
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
1.
Client Demands to School
a.
20% Tuition Refund ($15k)
i.
Reduction in Tuition
1)
% of students paying Full Tuition
ii.
Increased Financial Aid
b.
Removal of Probation
i.
Influence Provost
c.
Apology From School
i.
Content
ii.
Who Apologizing
2.
CBS Compared to Peer School Actions
a.
Ivy League/M7 B-Schools
i.
Travel Restrictions
ii.
Punishments
iii.
Violations Reported
iv.
COVID Rate
b.
Near-Peer Schools
3.
Potential Client Actions
a.
Tuition Strike
i.
Refuse to Pay
b.
Donation Withholding
i.
5-year Promise
ii.
Permanent Pledge
c.
Legal Actions
i.
Threaten to Sue
ii.
Take to Court
d.
Direct Communication w/ School
i.
Email Blasts
ii.
Phone Calls
e.
Petition
i.
% of Class
ii.
Alumni
f.
Media Pressure
i.
Journalism Fellows
ii.
TV Contacts
4.
Risks
a.
CU Withhold Degree
b.
More Negative Attention
Sample Framework
Question #1 / Framework (continued)
How do we approach pressuring the school into giving our clients a tuition reduction?
196


===== PDF p201 =====
Question #2
DISCLAIMER
Possible Discussion Points 
As Candidate explores each of these topics let them brainstorm and work the problem before informing them that the 
option is impossible. Let them struggle. Ask for recommendation once the total case time is 30 minutes
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
•Legal Recourse
Prompt- “What ways can we use threats of lawsuits to pressure Columbia University into giving in?” 
Result- “Litigation against a billion-dollar institution would take too long and would be prohibitively expensive. 
Additionally, there is no legal standing for an effective lawsuit and the school is unmoved by our client’s threats”
•Direct Communication with Columbia University
Prompt- “How can we pressure the administration to apologize, overturn the punishment and reduce tuition?”
Result- “The Provost of Columbia University issued the punishment and is unmoved by any appeals.”
•Donation Withholding 
Prompt- “How can we leverage not donating to pressure the school?”
Result- “The University already considers the current students a lost cause for donations.”
•Tuition Strike
Prompt- “How can we leverage going on tuition strike to pressure the school?”
Result- “The University has stated that if students refuse to pay their tuition, they will neither confer their degrees 
nor will they even allow the students to earn credits for the semester.”
•Petition 
Prompt- “Interesting idea. How would we go about getting a petition signed, by who, and how would we use that?”
Result- “Our clients already attempted a petition, and the school is unmoved.”
197


===== PDF p202 =====
Possible Discussion Points 
Question #2 (continued)
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
•Media Pressure
Prompt- “How could we use the media to pressure the school into giving in to our client’s demands?”
Result- “We don’t believe it’s a good idea to bring media attention to our clients traveling overseas and partying 
during a global pandemic that has killed millions of people. Not only is it in poor taste, but this will also likely result 
in more negative attention on our clients. For those who did not travel, they are students at an Ivy League institution 
and can expect no sympathy from a ravaged country.”
•Peer Schools
Prompt- “How can we use the actions of peer schools to pressure Columbia?”
Result- “No peer or near-peer school has given a tuition reduction. They also have similar travel punishment 
policies and thus will not be of help to our clients.” 
•Student Walkout
Prompt- “How could we plan and execute a walkout in a way that would pressure the school?”
Result- “If the students don’t attend class, they will receive Incompletes as grades and will be unable to graduate. 
This also would be unpopular to the student body as is disrespectful to the professors who are not involved in the 
punishment to our clients.”
•Targeting Alumni Support
Prompt- “How can we connect with the many CBS Alumni and motivate them to pressure the school?”
Result- “The Alumni overwhelmingly support the school in this matter and are not sympathetic to our clients. 
Many of them have lost family members and friends to the pandemic and are upset with our client’s behavior.”
•Miscellaneous/Other- Whatever rabbit hole they want to go down, encourage them to do so.
Prompt- “Tell me more about that. How would we approach that?”
Result- “I see. Unfortunately, that will not be an effective approach. How else can we pressure the school?”
198


===== PDF p203 =====
•
It is important to see whether the candidate has the 
courage to advise the client of news they don’t want 
to hear
•
“I recommend that we advise the client to drop their 
appeals to the school”
Recommendation
•
We should do this because the punishment was meted 
out by the provost of Columbia University and our 
clients don’t have any reasonable recourse to pressure 
or overturn the decision
•
All reasonable avenues have been explored to no avail, 
meaning this is a fruitless endeavor
Rationale
•
The main risk of this is that the clients will likely be 
extremely upset that there is nothing that can be done
Risks
•
Considering this risk, our next step is to communicate 
to the clients that they should finish out their degrees 
and move on
Next Steps
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
Conclusion
199


===== PDF p204 =====
Possible Discussion Points 
Keys to the Case and Feedback
Pay Me My Money, In Cash
1. Enthusiasm and Energy- When things aren’t going well, how is the candidate reacting to it? They should be focused 
on solving the problem with the interviewer and get to a solution
2. Structure- Keep their structure throughout the case. The candidate should always bucket their brainstorms and always 
write down their ideas as they are talking unless the interviewer tells them not to
3. Paper Hygiene- Each brainstorm should have a new piece of paper. Candidates should be prepared to give their paper 
to the interviewer at the end of the case. What insights would a firm gain from having their papers?
4. Recommendation- Candidates should have the courage to advise the client that they need to do something that they 
don’t want to do
5. Creativity- Brainstorms can be difficult. Candidates should continue to work the problem and come up with multiple 
ideas for each idea
6. Reassess- When candidates get stuck and are “taking a step back”, make sure they reference their framework and 
previous slides for ideas. Start from the big picture and work their way down
200
