===== PDF p105 =====
Business Type Cases (abbreviated answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
101 
The CEO of a large, diversified entertainment corporation has asked our team to examine the 
operations of a subsidiary of his corporation that manufactures video games.  Specifically, he 
needs to know if he should approve a $200 million capital request for tripling the division’s 
capacity.  You are a member of the team assigned to this project.  Assume you and I are at the 
first team meeting.  What are the critical issues we should plan to examine to determine if the 
industry is an attractive one for the CEO to continue to invest and why? 
[This case comes from an actual interviewer’s guide] 
 
Additional information provided (if interviewee asks probing questions): 
!"The division is the third largest manufacturer of hardware in the industry with ten percent 
market share.  The top two producers have 40 and 35 percent market share.  The remainder 
of the market is shared by small producers.  The division sells to a broad range of consumers. 
!"The division’s sales have increased rapidly over last year from a relatively small base.  The 
current estimate is annual sales of 500,000 units.  The current estimate of industry hardware 
sales is 5 million units annually.  Industry growth has been strong over the last few months, 
although sales growth has slowed. 
!"The current sales price for the basic unit is $45.  The division remains less than 20 percent of 
the parent company sales.  The two top competitors develop, manufacture, and sell both 
hardware and -software.  While our client makes and sells its own hardware, it only sells 
licensed software.  The industry growth of software continues to increase. 
!"The division estimates that the current fully loaded cost is $30 per unit.  Requested 
expansion should reduce the cost by 5 to 7 percent and triple production of the hardware 
units.  The two top competitors are estimated to have a 10 to 15 percent cost advantage 
currently.  The main costs are assembly, parts and labor. 
!"The division estimates much of initial target market (young families) has now purchased the 
video game hardware.  No large new user segments have been identified  
!"Primary outlets of distribution are toy and electronics stores. 
!"The division currently exceeds corporate return requirements, however, margins have 
recently been falling. 
!"The hardware standards have been established by the industry leaders.  The product features 
are constantly developed (e.g. new type of remote joystick) to appeal to segments of the 
market. 
 
Baseline Approach: (the following must be addressed) 
 
• 
What is the future market potential?  The candidate needs to question the continuation of the 
growth of the industry overall.  S/he might ask about the saturation of markets, competitive 
products (e.g. home computers), and declining “per capita” usage. 
• 
What is the competitive outlook?  The candidate should at least recognize the need to 
examine competitive dynamics.  Issue areas might include concentration of market shams, 
control of retail channels, and the R&D capabilities (rate of new product introductions, etc.) 
• 
What will the price/volume relationships in the future?  Issues of prices might need to be 
considered. 
 
Better Approach:  (move beyond the previous answers & incorporate the following) 
 
Market Potential 


===== PDF p106 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
102 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
· 
Recognize that there is a relationship between market penetration and growth in new 
users which, when combined, yields an industry volume estimate. 
· 
Address the shifting mix of product purchases, in this case from hardware (player unit) 
to software (video cassettes). 
· 
Investigate buyer behavior in key segments, i.e., “fad” potential of product. 
Software 
· 
Recognize that the technology standards are set by the industry leaders.  In this situation, 
the division, as a secondary player, will have to follow these standards.  Recognize that 
different distribution needs may exist for different products (in this case hardware versus 
software). 
Price/Volume Relationships  
· 
Discuss the effect capacity additions can have on overall industry price/volume 
relationships and on industry price levels. 
The Company’s Ability to Compete 
· 
The candidate should ask what the expansion is designed to do. 
· 
The candidate should explore the cost position of the client division relative to that of the 
other competitors. 
· 
The candidate should seek to understand the reasons for poor profit performance of the 
division. 
