===== PDF p157 =====
' 
' 
' 
' l 
I I 
I 
I 
' 
! 
32. Big Pharma vs. Biotech 
Stem 
your client is a major pharmaceutical company. You were approached by the director of 
licensing to evaluate a potential investment opportunity for the company. A biotech firm has 
been developing a new oncology treatment that is expected to reach market in 2 years. The 
licensing director has asked you whether or not the drug is a good investment opportunity for the 
pharmaceutical company, and if it is, then whether the company should license the drug from the 
biotech fitm or acquire the drug outright. 
Behind the Scenes: This is a difficult and long case (45 minutes to 1 hour). Parts of the case 
can be shortened or skipped if necessary, but all parts are worth working through if you have 
time. The case is particularly valuable because it assesses the interviewee's ability to I) 
logically think through an industry the interviewee likely knows little about (the pharmaceutical 
industry}; and 2) analyze the high-level strategic considerations involved in a negotiation 
process. This case is especially difficult because it is not about the numbers; the real value lies 
in being able to take on multiple perspectives in order to assess relative bargaining power and 
important personal factors that would come to play in a negotiation. 
1 ''Phase: Evaluating the Dmg as an Investment Opportunity 
Behind the Scenes: This should be similar to a market entry/M&A analysis. The precise 
numbers are not important; howev6f, broad assumptions should be supported with sound 
reasoning. Let this be a conversation and do not provide data until asked, although encourage 
the appropriate questions if the interviewee is getting off track or taking too long. 
Interviewer: How would you go about evaluating the drug's potential value? 
Case Data: 
Drug and Market Data: 
Note: oncology= cancer (the clinical term for cancer treatment) 
The drug is a chemotherapy treatment for 3'd stage colon cancer. 
There are 1 million patients in the U.S. cunently diagnosed with colon cancer. 1/3 of 
diagnosed patients are in the 3 rd stage. 
· 
. 
3'd stage colon cancer is a terminal condition (i.e., there is no cure and patients will 
eventually die). 
The net growth in the patient population is 4% per year (i.e., the number of new 
diagnoses less the number of patients that die each year increases the total population of 
diagnosed patients by 4% per year). 
The drug is a palliative h·eatment, not a cure. Clinical trials show that the drug will be 
better than competitive treatments currently available in two ways: 
150 


===== PDF p158 =====
o The drug will extend the life of patients to an average life expectancy with 
treatment= 1 year (this is longer than with competitive options). 
o The drug will have fewer painful side effects than existing chemotherapy drugs. 
The marketing department intends to set the price of the drug at $10,000 per dose, in line 
with existing competitive treatments. 
o Note: 1 dose= a full course of treatment (i.e., only 1 dose per patient, with no 
repeat treatments). 
The drug is cun·ently entering Phase III clinical trials (the final phase before FDA 
approval). 
There are 12 more years left on the patent (Note: dmg patents typically last 16 years). 
There is a high likelihood that the dmg will be approved by the FDA 
Costs to produce the drug once it reaches market can be assumed to be in line with an 
average drug. There is nothing overly complicated, special or expensive about producing 
this drug; 
Interviewer: Given what you know, what do you thin.lc is the maximum potential revenue that 
could be expected from sales of the drug? 
Possible Answer: 
The cunent maximum potential market size can be calculated as follows: 
o 
1 million total colon cancer patients x 1/3 in 3rd stage= 333,000 potential patients 
who would be eligible for treatment cunently. 
o Assuming the average life expectancy with treatment= 1 year, and that 1 dose= I 
full course of treatment, we can assume a maximum potential sales volume of 
333,000 doses per year, given the current eligible patient population. 
o At $10,000 per dose, the total potential sales this year= $3.33 billion. 
However, this assumes that all diagnosed patients will be treated, which is unreasonable 
if you consider the following: 
o Not all patients are covered by insurance. 
" 
(Note: it is reasonable to assume that the drug will be covered by 
insurance because it is better than altemative treatments, but priced the 
same.) 
o Not all patients will choose treatment even if they could afford it, given that 
chemotherapy is highly unpleasant and is not a cure. 
Also, it is unreasonable to expect that this drug would achieve 100% market share as 
some doctors and/or patients may be unwilling to switch treatments. 
On the other hand, the total eligible patient population is growing at 4% per year, and the 
dmg will take 2 years to reach market, and a few more years after that to reach peak 
sales. 
Taking into account all of the above considerations, a reasonable final assessment of the 
maximum annual revenue would be $2 to $3 billion. 
o 
(NOTE: the interviewee can make simplifying assumptions about the above 
adjustments, but this number should be thought through.) 
$2 to $3 billion in aruma! sales is a lot of money- that sounds like it could be a 
blockbuster! 
15 I 


===== PDF p159 =====
j 
I 
Phase: Understanding the Market 
Behind the Scenes: This section is intended to get the interviewee to think through the forces 
involved in a market they likely know little about. This is not at all about the numbers. The 
interviewee should be able to logically derive the impmiant variable factors and risks in the 
pharmaceutical market. If you are pressed for time you can skip this section. 
Interviewer: Great. Now without worrying about the specific numbers, can you draw a graph 
that shows what you expect the trajectory of revenues to be over time for the drug (draw a graph 
with time on the x-axis and revenues on they-axis)? 
Possible Answer: 
Sales 
Year2 
YearS 
Year 12 
The drug will reach market in Year 2, but it will then take a few years to build up market share. 
However, given that the drug is better than the competitive options, we can assume that the drug 
will reach peak sales around year 5. After the peak, that sales would probably plateau or maybe 
decrease slightly as new drugs might potentially enter the market. Finally, sales would probably 
drop off entirely (or at least to a negligible level) as the patent expires and generics reach the 
market. 
(NOTE: pretty much any variation of the above can be justified, but the key issues that should be 
reflected are 1) we should expect that it will take a few years to build up market share, 2) sales 
will eventually reach a peak or at least level off (or given the growth in the market, one could 
argue that sales will grow along with the patient population), and 3) sales will drop considerably 
when the patent expires). 
Interviewer: (Talk through the assumptions made in drawing the revenue graph. If the 
interviewee does not explicitly discuss marketing, ask the following question). What do you 
think will be the single most significant factor that would affect how quickly the drug will be 
adopted and reach peak sales (i.e., how steep the slope of the graph will be in the early years)? 
152 


===== PDF p160 =====
• 
Possible Answer: Marketing expenditures. There's a lot of marketing in the pharmaceutical 
industry: a large sales team would have to go to oncology conferences, advertise in medical 
journals and meet individually with doctors to inform them about the fuug 
Interviewer: On the same graph, can you draw what you expect the marketing expenditures to 
look like over time? Again, you can ignore the precise values, but try to capture the relative size 
of marketing expense vs. revenues over time for the drug. 
Possible Answer: 
Sales 
Year2 
Year 5 
Year 12 
Marketing to start very high a year or two before the drug reaches market. Once the drug enters 
the market I'd expect marketing to increase slightly, and then eventually drop off as the dmg 
reaches its peak market share. I would expect at least some maintenance marketing to continue 
over the life of the dmg until the patent expires. 
(NOTE: Typical dmg marketing expenditures start 1-2 years before a drug is launched, and then 
eejual200% of Year 1 sales, 100% of Year 2 sales, 50% of Year 3 sales and then decrease over 
time.) 
3rd Phase: Strategic Analysis of the Drug as an Investment Opportunity 
Interviewer: So what do you think? Do you think the drug is a valuable investment opportunity 
that the client should pursue? 
Possible Answer: Yes, the drug could likely be a blockbuster. Assuming costs are in line with 
typical dmgs, then this drug could be significantly profitable. However, that all depends on the 
price our client would have to pay to license or acquire the dmg. Also, I'd want to know a bit 
more about our client to make sure it makes strategic sense to pursue the dmg. 
Interviewer: Well I agree, it definitely sounds like the drug will be valuable. Now the question 
is whether or not the drug will be valuable for your client. How would you go about evaluating 
whether or not your client should pursue the drug? 
153 


===== PDF p161 =====
! I • 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
Behind the Seems: This section should address the high-level strategic considerations that 
should be used in evaluating any major investment opportunity. In pmiicular, three major 
questions should be addressed: 
1. Feasibility- Is the investment even feasible? Does the film have the resources (money, 
time, capabilities) to make the investment even if it wanted to? If not, then there is no 
need to bother with any more analysis. 
2. Strategic Sense- Does the investment make strategic sense for the firm? Does it fit with 
their cunent business model? Does it compliment their cunent product line, or will it 
cannibalize sales? There should be a compelling reason why the firm wants to make the 
investment beyond simply monetary considerations. 
' 
3. Price - Can the fnm get a good price for the investment? Remember, there is always a 
price too high that will make a project have a negative NPV, and there is usually a price 
low enough to give the project a positive NPV. 
Let this be a conversation, but provide some guidance about the strategic issues you want to 
discuss. In particular, steer the interviewee away from focusing on the numbers. 
Case Data: 
Company (Client) Data.· 
Massive phmmaceutical company (think of Pfizer, Wyeth, GlaxoSmithK.line, etc.) . 
NOTE: All Big Pharma companies typically have tons of cash and little, if any, debt. 
Company cun·ently does not have any oncology (cancer) treatments. 
Company has the resources (production capacity, sales expertise, R&D staff and lab 
space, etc.) to take on the new dmg. 
Target (Biotech Firm) Data: 
Small biotech finn, founded 10 years ago by the current CEO straight out of medical 
school. 
Can be assumed that the cunent dmg under development is the only dmg in the pipeline. 
Possible Answer: Well given that our client is a massive pharmaceutical company, it seems 
reasonable to assume that the investment would be feasible (i.e., they have enough resources-
cash, capacity, expertise, etc.- to take on the dmg). 
Also, from a strategic perspective, I think this dmg could be a great opportunity for the client to 
enter the oncology market, and without any current treatments in their pipeline, they wouldn't 
have to wony abotrt possibly cannibalizing the sales of one of their own existing products. Of 
course, I'm assuming again that our sales team could develop the expertise and contacts 
necessary to market the drug, and that we have the production capacity to successfully launch the 
drug in the market. 
154 


===== PDF p162 =====
So it's feasible and makes strategic sense for our client to pursue the drug- now the only 
question is can they get a good price for it? 
[; 
4th Phase: Analyzing the Negotiation for Acquisition vs. Licensing 
Interviewer: How do you think the price that your client will be pay will be determined? 
Possible Answer: Well I imagine that both our client and the biotech finn would arrive at a 
valuation for the drug, and then the final.price would be decided based on a negotiation. 
Interviewer: Assuming that the price will be arrived at via negotiation, what factors will 
dete1mine whether or not your client will get a good price, and in particular, are there any factors 
that might make an acquisition or a licensing atTangement a more attractive option for your 
client? 
Behind the Scenes: The key here is to perform a risk-benefit analysis fi·om the perspective of 
each pmty in the negotiation. Again, let this be a conversation, and try to get the interviewee to 
analyze the problem from both perspectives involved in the negotiation. 
Possible Answer: The following table summarizes some thoughts about the relative value of the 
drug to either our client or the biotech fnm. 
Client: Big Pliarma 
Target: Biotech 
(-) Less inf01mation about the clinical 
( +) More information about the drug, its 
effectiveness of the drug, or problems or costs 
effectiveness, development processes, costs, 
associated with development. This would lead 
etc. This would lead to a higher valuation ( 
to a lower valuation (or at least less accurate). 
at least more accurate). 
(+)Possibly more information about the drug's 
(-)Less infonnation about drug's commercial 
commercial potential, given the large amount 
potential, given limited experience bringing 
of experience, established sales force, 
drugs to market_ 
connections within the medical industry, etc. 
Although, limited experience with oncology 
treatment could temper this. 
( +) Given above market expertise, the dmg 
(-) The dmg would be less valuable if the 
would likely be more valuable if the client 
biotech finn tries to bring it to market alone. 
brings the dmg to market (they could do a 
They don't have the market expe1tise, and may 
better job selling it, and make it more 
not have the production capacity or necessary 
profitable then could the biotech alone). 
scale. 
( +) The cost of capital for the client is likely 
(-) The cost of capital is likely higher, making 
much lower than for the biotech finn (mature 
the NPV valuation of the dmg lower than for 
business; very little, if any, debt; a portfolio of 
the Big Phanna client (see reasons to the left). 
drugs; etc.). Given the financial timeline of the 
dmg with heavy upfront costs on R&D, CapEx 
investments in production, and marketing· 
expenditures, followed later by positive cash 
flows, the lower discount rate would make the 
!55 


===== PDF p163 =====
A ... 
drug more valuable for our client than the 
biotech firm. 
(+)While the dmg could be valuable to the 
(-)The biotech finn is entirely dependent on 
client, they have an entire portfolio of dmgs to 
the success or failure of this drug. They would 
fall back on and don't need this particular dmg 
likely be more desperate to get a payout. 
Based on the above, it seems clear that the drug would likely be more valuable to our client than 
it would be to the biotech firm alone. Therefore, I think our client could likely get a good price 
for the dmg in a negotiation, assuming other competitors are not also bidding for the drug. Of 
course, if there is other competition for the dmg, then the biotech firm would have much more 
bargaining power and could extract more of the value from the dmg. But either way, the biotech 
finn would likely prefer to at least partner with another established phannaceutical company to 
bring the drug to market, because more value would be created that way than if the biotech went 
to market alone. 
Now I'd like to consider the question of licensing versus acquiring the dmg outright. Do you 
. have any more infonnation about the structure of a typical licensing agreement or what exactly 
an acquisition would entail? 
Interviewer: Sure. There is really no "typical" licensing agreement. Most licensing 
arrangements usually involve a series of milestone payments when the dmg reaches certain 
phases of development (i.e., completes a clinical trial, or receives FDA approval); as well as a 
split of revenues once the drug is launched in the market (a revenue split is more common than a 
profit split because profits depend more on accounting conventions, and are therefore easier to 
manipulate). You can assume that a license for this dmg would primarily involve a revenue 
split, and you can ignore milestone payments. 
Alternatively, in an acquisition the acquirer would typically acquire all the rights to the drug as 
well as the R&D staff and resources currently employed in developing the drug. In this·case, 
because the biotech firm is only developing this single drug, you can assume that the entire 
company would be acquired in a traditional M&A context. 
So, given that, what do you think makes more sense: to license the drug, or acquire the target 
outright? 
Possible Answer: The following table summarizes some thoughts about the relative value of 
licensing the dmg versus acquiring the target from both the perspective of our client and the 
biotech firm. 
Client: Big l.'harma 
Tar"et: Biotech 
Risk Factors: 
Risk Factors: 
The client likely has a much higher risk 
The biotech fitm (and more importantly its 
tolerance than does the biotech finn. The 
investors) likely have a much lower risk 
client is larger, more mature, has tons of cash, 
tolerance than does the big phmma company. 
and a portfolio of dmgs. The success or failure 
The fitm is entirely reliant on the success or 
of this single dmg would likely neither make 
failure of this single drug, and does not have a 
nor break the fitm. 
portfolio of other drugs to fall back on. 
!56 


===== PDF p164 =====
• 
From the perspective or risk, selling the drug 
rather thanlicensing it would be less 1isky for 
the biotech firm; hence, the biotech may be 
willing to give a better price in an acquisition 
than in a licensing deal. 
Financing Factors: 
Financing Factors: 
From a financing perspective, the client has the The biotech firm probably has significant VC 
resources to make the investment, but they also 
financing, and large amounts of debt. The 
likely have other investment opportunities. The VC's may be more interested in a quick 
client does not need this drug to be successful, 
guaranteed cash payout, rather than a 
but it would like to have it, depending on the 
prolonged development with an unsure payoff. 
price. 
Furthermore, a guaranteed cash payout 
guarantees debt service will be possible. 
In this case, given the biotech firm's potential 
financial constraints, the biotech film again 
may be willing to give a better price for an 
acquisition then for a licensing arrangement. 
Personal/Emotional Factors: 
Personal/Emotional Factors: 
The client is the licensing director for a major 
The CEO of the biotech film founded the frrrn 
phatmaceutical company. His daily job is to 
straight out of medical school. This is likely 
license or acquire drugs as inves(!llents for the 
the CEO's pet project. He likely feels very 
client company. He would obviously like to 
attached to the project. He may be an example 
get a good deal on a promising drug, but he 
of"founder's syndrome," and would therefore 
likely has little emotional attachment to the 
be reluctant to give up control of his company 
drug itself. 
by selling it outright, and may therefore give a 
better deal for a licensing arrangement. 
On the other hand, perhaps this is the CEO's 
ticket to riches and he's looking forward to an 
early retirement, or to building another startup. 
In this case, perhaps the CEO would be more 
willing to sell then license the drug. 
These factors are unclear, but should definitely 
be taken into consideration. Perhaps if the 
CEO was a 65-year-old industry veteran the 
story would be different. 
Recommendation 
Interviewer: The licensing director would like ;m update on your recommendation. What should 
he do? 
157 


===== PDF p165 =====
1 
Possible Answer: Pursue an acquisition of the dmg. The dmg is a very promising treatment that 
is better than the competitive options cunently available. With reasonable assumptions about 
market share and growth forecasts, you can expect that this dmg could be a blockbuster with $2 
to $3 billion in peak annual sales. Furthermore, the dmg represents a good strategic opportunitY • 
for the company to enter the oncology market. I also think that your company has strategic 
· · ·•. 
advantages relative to the biotech f= that would allow you to get a good price to make the dfug· 
a profitable investment opportunity. I recommend that you pursue an outright acquisition of the 
dmg rather than a licensing deal as I think it's likely that you would get a better deal with an 
acquisition. Finally, I recommend you act quickly to acquire the dmg. The longer you wait, the 
more likely it will be that your competitors would bid on the dmg, shifting much more 
bargaining power back to the biotech finn. 
158 
