===== PDF p21 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
17
6. Bike Helmet                                                                      ____ 
Type of Case: Private Equity and Market Sizing  
Difficulty: Moderate  
   
Opening  
   
Your client is a Private Equity firm that mainly works in the manufacturing industry. When 
making a decision about whether or not to purchase a company, they look at projected profits of 
the company 3-5 years out.  
              • If profits are flat or up, buy  
              • If profits are down, do not buy  
   
They are considering purchasing a firm that makes bike helmets and bike accessories; you have 
been hired to determine whether or not they should purchase this firm.  
   
Background  
   
              • The company only sells its products in the US  
              • Revenue mix from the two product lines is 50/50  
              • Company currently has 70% market share  
              • If the candidate asks “Is the overall bike helmet market growing?”  Ask them “what 
              do you think?” and make them justify their answer. Ask them to provide you with a 
              percentage growth or shrinking (range ok)  
Example of an answer, but obviously there are many: “I believe the bike helmet 
market is growing because people are exercising more because of health concerns, 
gas prices are  increasing rapidly so more people are using bikes as transportation (I 
had this case during the $4/gallon gas days), and Lance Armstrong has revived an 
interest in the sport.” 
 
Another sample answer, “When I was growing up, hardly anyone wore bike helmets, 
but now with increased government regulation and safety concerns, almost all bikers 
wear helmets.  Therefore, we can think about growth in the bike helmet industry in 
relation to growth in the interest in biking.  
              • Company has good relationships with suppliers  
              • The products are distributed mainly through specialty stores  
   
Areas of Discussion  
   
At some appropriate point during the interview, ask the candidate to determine the annual 
revenue of the company (market sizing). A good trick on this part is to realize that since the 
revenue mix is 50/50, they only have to size one of the product lines, and then double their 
answer at the end.  It is easier to size the bike helmets, because accessories is a very broad 
category.   
 


===== PDF p22 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
18
There is no “right way” to size the market, but here are considerations  
              • Age  
              • Income  
              • Urban/rural  
              • Bike helmet laws  
              • Delivery  
   
Analysis (Calculations to be completed by interviewee.)  
   
The candidate should size the entire market, and then take 70% of the total market since they 
have 70% market share  
Sample Answer, but estimates and factors for consideration will vary:   
 
The candidate must be able to justify the numbers through each step of the process.  
 
Additional information:  
              • Competition: 20% of players are at the low end  
              • Most new entrants into the market have been at the high-end of the market  
              • If the candidate asks about new entrants, ask them what they think. Few barriers to 
              entry.  
              • The company was originally in the high-end of the market, but is now in the mass 
              market  
                            oDifferent product lines for high-end and mass market  
                            oMass merchandizing makes about 60% of the market and bike shops make up 
                            about 40%  
              • If the candidate asks where the company distributes its product, put the question back 
              on them. “Where do you think?”  
                            oSpecialty stores, Sports Authority, Wal-Mart, Target  
              • Ask “what are the risks of selling at Wal-Mart”  
                            oSqueezed on the prices  
              • What is more profitable, selling to the mass market or in specialty stores?  
                            o Selling to the mass market is more profitable because of distribution costs.  
   
   
   
Recommended Conclusion  
   
This case is really designed to see how the interviewee thinks. The candidate needs to make 
assumptions and justify them throughout. The interviewer should push back on each assumption.  
In the end, the recommendation should be to not buy the company because the lower end of the 
bike helmet industry is most profitable, but has little product differentiation.  
