===== PDF p49 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
45 
 
I’m sure you know that the campaign for the Presidential elections is currently underway. Both 
Bush and Gore have proposed a instituting a change to the retirement benefits policy for all 
employees whereby every employee makes a contribution ranging from $500 to $2000, 
depending on who wins, to a retirement account and the savings grows tax free till the employee 
retires. We have been approached by a client that runs a large mutual fund to help answer two 
questions they have: Is this a big opportunity? What are the various possibilities and challenges 
they would face? 
 
I’d like to explore three broad areas in helping answer the first question – the dynamics of the 
mutual fund industry, incremental savings entering the mutual fund market and finally regulatory 
or exogenous factors affecting the mutual fund industry as a result of changes to existing policy. 
 
First, can you tell me more about the size and dynamics of the mutual fund industry? 
 
!"Sure. As you may be familiar, mutual fund companies solicit investments from 
individuals, retirement accounts of various firms, etc. They then invest these monies to 
create and manage a well-diversified portfolio for a management fee. From the 
investors’ perspective, the creation of such a portfolio minimizes the risk.  
 
Got it. How big is this industry? 
 
!"There are, of course, a large number of players. The total assets under management 
itself could run in the trillions of dollars, so this is a very large industry. 
 
Do we have a sense for how much new money enters the industry? I ask since this will directly 
help determine if the proposed policy change will be a big opportunity for the industry or not. 
 
!"I see what you mean. Based on our internal studies and analysis, last year about $170 
billion was new money or additions to assets under management in the mutual fund 
industry. 
 
OK, let me now move to sizing the incremental savings that is likely to enter the investment pool 
of dollars. I’m going to make some assumptions, please stop me if any of them are outrageous or 
unrealistic. My objective is to size the employed population of the United States. Let’s assume 
that individuals between the ages of 20 and 60 are eligible to be employed. If the life expectancy 
in the U.S. is, say, 80, and if the population is uniformly distributed by age. I know this is a big 
assumption, but for sake of this discussion, let’s make it noting that in a real-life engagement, we 
should be able to get a fairly accurate estimate of individuals in this age range from any number 
of databases.  
 
!"OK, that sounds fine for now. 
 
So, about half the US population, or about 125 million, is eligible to be employed. I’m going to 
assume that the labor force, that is people that are actually employed is about 80% of this 
number. We are basically excluding homemakers, students, etc. who would be in the 20 to 60 age 


===== PDF p50 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
46 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
range. So we are looking at a labor force of 100 million. Figuring that the unemployment rate in 
the U.S. is running at about 5%, the actual number of people employed is about 95 million. 
 
!"Why don’t we just ignore the unemployment rate for now and assume a round number of 
100 million? 
 
Oh, this would make life easy. You indicated a range of $500 to $2000 for retirement account 
contributions. Would these be recurring annual contributions? 
 
!"Yes. Let’s also assume that, since we don’t know who’s going to win, the contribution 
would be $1000 on average. 
 
Great. So the increase to the investable assets would be $100 million times $1000, or $100 
billion. Wow, that sounds like a substantial increase, given that last year the new addition to 
assets under management was $170 billion! Are there any other regulatory issues or exogenous 
factors that would govern or restrict how these assets can be invested?  
 
!"There are some stipulations, but let’s not worry too much about them for now.  
 
Excellent, in that case, our response to the first question would surely be that this is a substantial 
opportunity for our client in aggregate.  
 
!"I’d probably agree that this is a substantial opportunity in aggregate. But how would 
you go about determining if is this a profitable opportunity? 
 
I think I see where you are going. You mentioned our client charges some sort of management 
fee for services rendered. How much is this fee and what types of expenses does the client incur? 
 
!"Good question. The client charges a 1% management fee on assets under management. 
Simplistically, let’s assume that administrative expenses on these assets like mailing 
statements, etc. is about $10 annually, while other operating expenses add up to about 
10basis points. 
 
Interesting. On every $1000 invested then, we make $10 in revenues but have $10 plus $1 or $11 
in expenses. That doesn’t look profitable.  
 
!"No, it does not, does it? Would you still think that this still a substantial opportunity? 
 
Well, it doesn’t seem that way. Hmmm…Let me take a couple of seconds to think through this. 
 
!"Sure. 
 
Ah, I think I see what may be happening. What happens in the second year when the assets grow 
based on the return earned? If we assume the $1000 grows to, say $1200, our revenues now look 
like $12 but expenses are only $11.20. We begin to make a profit. If we know how long a 
customer keeps the investment, we can present value the cash flows to figure out a lifetime 
customer value to the client. Then there’s the new $1000 that the customer would invest the 


===== PDF p51 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
47 
second year. So it does appear to be profitable, though I’m not sure how it compares to profits 
currently. 
 
!"Bingo! It is a profitable business. Right now, the size of each customer’s account is 
pretty substantial. It tends to run on the order of tens of thousands, so that the profit 
margin is much more attractive. We seem to be running out of time. Can you quickly 
summarize for me what opportunities and challenges the client faces, given our analysis 
so far? 
 
Sure. There are a number of opportunities and along with it. Among the opportunities, the first is 
cross selling the mutual fund opportunity to customers of the brokerage and other services. This 
would result in enhancing customer loyalty and also increase switching costs, leading to higher 
customer retention. Second, emphasizing convenience, sort of the one-stop shop for financial-
services idea, can enhance the client’s value proposition to their customers. On the challenges 
front, the most critical is probably competition. If indeed $100 billion additional funds are likely 
to be invested, every financial services firm is going to want a slice of the pie, which only 
underscores the need to cross sell and increase customer loyalty. This is something the client is 
going to have deal with. 
 
!"Great. Let’s assume that you are riding down an elevator with the CEO of the client. And 
he wants to know what we think.  
 
I’d draw him a 2 by 2 matrix, with industry revenue potential on one axis and attractiveness of 
this opportunity to the client on the other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I’d argue that the opportunity has a lot of potential for the entire industry. However, the 
attractiveness to the client needs further analysis. There are a number of interesting opportunities 
that this policy change presents, but also a few challenges that the client will have to overcome in 
order to reap the full benefits.  
 
A matrix is always a good thing to draw; you already sound like a consultant! #  
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Low 
 
High 
Industry revenue potential 
Attractiveness High 
to 
 
Client
Low
