===== PDF p90 =====
27.) New Drug Sales Increase (BeG, Round 1) 
Stem: Our client is a pharmaceutical manufacturer that has just released a new drug 18 months 
ago and has been underwhelmed with sales. They want BCG to figure out why the sales have 
been so dismal, and also, what can- be done about it. 
Phase 1: Competitive Landscape and Product Differentiation 
When prompted for information, you can reveal this: 
• 
The drug treats high blood pressure 
• 
There are many kinds of drugs that treat hypertension, and they're grouped into 5 classes 
according to how they work 
• 
Our drug is in a new class ~ class six 
• 
Our drug retails for $120 a month, after insurance covers a pOltion of it, patients need to pay 
$25 a month out of pocket 
• 
All other classes but 1 have gone generic, and retail at $4 a month after insurance covers the 
other portion 
• 
The other drug class that isn't generic yet is a class called ARP, it retails also at $120 a 
month with similar insurance breakdown. However, Yz of the ARP drugs will have patents 
expire the next year, so generic versions will come out very soon thereafter. The other Y2 of 
ARP drugs will meet a similar fate in 2 years ... Ultimately, the only other drug that is sold in 
non-generic form will be gone in 2 years. 
• 
Our drug is safe with no reactions to other drugs or side effects. It sets blood pressure down 
about 14 MMGH, the range for all drugs is 14-17, and the ARPs lower blood pressure to 
around 14-16 .... So, our drug is on the low end, and doctors prefer drugs to lower pressure as 
much as possible, although hypotension can be a big concern 
• 
The only differentiator between our drug and the ARPs is that our drug stays in the system 
longer. With hypertension medication, if you miss a dose (once a day), your blood pressure 
spikes up even more than before you started taking the drug, which is very unsafe. With our 
drug, you can miss a dose and everything will be fine. 
Phase 2: Stakeholder Relations 
When prompted, you can reveal the following: 
• 
The drug company has good relations with most insurance carriers and the drug has gotten 
onto most formularies, and should be easily accessible. Contacting the insurance companies 
has been exhausted, and there is marketing saturation with the company's means of being 
....... Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~:~l.?~~ Club 
2010-2011 1 st Year Case Book 
136 


===== PDF p91 =====
able to reach out to other insurance companies. Ultimately, pushing to more insurance 
companies is not an option 
• 
Patients don't know much about blood pressure drugs, and don't really care what they get 
• 
Doctors are aware of the drug, but think it's very expensive, don't believe it's on formularies, 
and aren't sure when and to whom to prescribe it. 
Phase 3: Marketing Ideas 
Marketing more to insurance companies is a dead end, as they're saturated already. Marketing 
efforts should be focused first on doctors (providers), and then on patients. 
Some possible things to bring up for doctors: 
• 
High-touch sales efforts - office visits to get awareness out 
• 
Materials to bring awareness of the drug, its benefits, and also its insurance formulary 
availability to light 
• 
Guidelines on when and to whom to prescribe. 
Some possible ideas for patients: 
• 
Ads or commercials bringing out the fact that the drug is more forgiving on missing a dose 
• 
There should be adequate messaging so that patients don't feel encouraged to act recklessly 
on moral hazard 
• 
Try to hammer on the fact that patients should be motivated through the big value 
proposition of accidentally missing a dose with no ill consequence to ask for this drug from 
their doctors 
Phase 4: Recommendation 
The candidate should bring to the fore that the problem in revenue growth has come as a result of 
the stakeholders in charge of prescribing and purchasing the drug not having enough information 
about it. The candidate should focus on the fact that making doctors aware of the drug's 
insurance connections and increasing education of physicians will have the most drastic impact. 
Also, with the right ads and commercials, it's possible that this could become the first "celebrity" 
blood pressure drug, and further pull demand with patients requesting the drug from their 
doctors. 
......: - Management-
1111111111 Consulting 
~~~t~:!.~ Club 
2010-2011 1st Year Case Book 
137 
