===== PDF p17 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
13
4. Cut Cut Cut                                                                                
Type of Case: Cost Reduction  
Difficulty: Low  
   
Opening  
Our client is the CFO of a large multi-billion dollar consumer goods company in North America. 
The recent economic crisis has generated a need to drastically reduce costs in order to maintain 
the firms’ future competitiveness. The senior executive team has come up with a cost reduction 
goal of $500 million by 2012. Since the company expects to growth its sales over the period, it 
has been determined that core activities such as production plans, sales, and marketing should 
not be affected/touched by this initiative.  
The CFO, who is responsible for the initiative, has approached our firm in order to develop a 
comprehensive understanding of cost reduction alternatives, as well as a recommendation on 
what would be the appropriate approach/steps to execute this initiative. Finally, he has asked for 
input on who should be involved in this initiative.  
   
Areas of Discussion  
•       Potential opportunities:  
o      Direct productivity improvement due to workload imbalances  
o      Technology implementations that would reduce manual work  
o      Move selected operations (accounting, finance, etc.) to low-cost locations  
o      Outsource selected operations (call centers, transactional work)  
o      Consolidate office locations to reduce/distribute fixed costs  
o      Eliminate excessive organizational levels  
o      Eliminate low added-value work  
o      Implement a supplier consolidation process to achieve better COGS  
•       Approach to implement:  
o      Form a team  
o      Create incentives to promote results/collaboration  
o      Understand the opportunities (list them out, size them, get the data)  
o      Benchmark with other companies and initiatives  
o      Restore areas that are not performing as designed  
o      Eliminate/change areas that are performing as designed, but still have                    
opportunity areas  
o      Implement, adjust and correct  
•       Who should be involved:  
o      Functional experts  
o      Support from upper management  
o      Customers, both external (suppliers, consumers, etc.) and internal  
o      Functional areas impacted by changes  
   
Analysis (Calculations to be completed by interviewee.)  
No calculations required  


===== PDF p18 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
14
Recommended Conclusion  
   
This case is a higher-level strategic analysis, and as such could have multiple answers. A strong 
recommendation would include a sufficiently exhaustive analysis of all three areas requested by 
the client (opportunities, approach and involvement), including ideas that might not be 
implemented. Once all ideas have been laid out, the candidate should select one or various and 
propose them as a sound recommendation. For instance, a candidate might recommend reducing 
organizational layers/levels, to eliminate non-added-value work and balance workload as a first 
“low hanging fruit” stage. But since this course of action is unlikely to deliver $500 million in 
savings, this recommendation should be complemented with more extensive efforts, such as 
moving work to low-cost locations, outsourcing, implementing technology to simplify/eliminate 
work, or consolidate suppliers to reduce COGS. In terms of the appropriate steps to be followed, 
the outline above is based on Six-Sigma and Organizational Change models, and although the 
approach does not have to necessarily be exactly the same, it should include key areas such as 
creating a responsible team, benchmarking, incentives, and the implementation/correction cycle. 
As for who should be involved, key players to consider include subject/area experts, clients, and 
management commitment and involvement.  
