===== PDF p20 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
15 
5. Call It Excess Capacity        
 
    
 
 
 
Type of Case: Pricing Strategy, Competitive Response, Supply Chain 
Difficulty:  Moderate 
 
Opening 
 
We are consulting for VoiceDirect.  They have been packaging and reselling excess capacity 
on their cellular network to highly fragmented prepaid phone card buyers.  Over the past year, 
VoiceDirect has lost significant market share.  What is happening, and how can VoiceDirect 
recover? 
 
Background and Areas of Discussion 
 
Who are the competitors?  Only three other players (Sprint, AT&T, T-Mobile) 
 
What is the pricing? VoiceDirect charges five cents per minute, all three other competitors 
charge three cents.   
 
Ask candidate to calculate VoiceDirect's percentage price premium  
 
The price premium is equal to 66% 
 
The candidate should first draw a diagram to understand the market. The cellular market in the 
US is divided into Contract (or pay after usage) and Prepaid minutes. We are not analyzing the 
“contract” segment.  The competitors’ strategy is to sell their excess capacity to the prepaid 
market. In light of current economy conditions and with the assumption that people who rely 
on prepaid cards are mostly those who have difficulty getting Contracts due to a bad credit 
history, this segment is growing. 
 
The candidate then should ask what is the excess capacity for VoiceDirect (we can assume near 
infinite capacity) as well as demonstrate understanding that the marginal cost for providing this 
capacity is zero. 
 
At this stage the candidate should try to evaluate the issues behind the loss of market share. 
After computing the VoiceDirect’s price premium (66%) the candidate should establish three 
hypotheses. (1) There is no differentiation that justifies the price premium, technological 
(quality of the signal), geographical (geographic availability), customer service, etc… (2) 
There is differentiation but it is not perceived by the market; (3) there is differentiation, the 
market perceives it but because of its place on the low end of the segment, people are not 
willing to pay for it. 
 
For scenarios (1) and (3), a possible strategy would be to match the competitors’ prices, go 
from five cents/minute to three cents/minute. At this point, the candidate should argue that if 
VoiceDirect’s prices for postpaid cards are larger than 3 cents/minute, there is the possibility of 
cannibalization of their customer base. 


===== PDF p21 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
16 
5. Call It Excess Capacity continued…        
 
    
 
For scenario (2) the candidate should suggest possible marketing initiatives (a test to the 
candidate’s creativity). Possible examples are: joint campaigns with powerful brands offering 
prepaid cards (remember the marginal cost is zero); offering cards with a phone, offering 
supplemental postpaid cards; two-for-one campaigns; offering prepaid cards in exchange for 
competitors’ cards (but need to check if it is possible in light of regulatory restrictions); etc…  
 
At this point the interviewer should ask the candidate for other possible strategies (restart the 
top-down process) 
• Can we enter into a contract at a set price to provide minutes to major prepay 
providers?  The answer is no, Virgin Mobile already has an agreement with one of our 
competitors.  The rest of the market is very fragmented. 
 
• Can we vertically integrate and repackage the minutes ourselves, creating our own 
prepay brand?  Or is Virgin’s presence too strong to compete? 
 
• Does the price premium reflect down to the consumer level, or do the repackagers (gas 
stations, Wal-Marts, etc) eat the price delta? Would it make sense to renegotiate with 
repackagers to lower their margins? 
 
Analysis  
 
Price premium percentage (as seen above).  The marginal cost of providing extra minutes (it’s 
zero) 
 
Key Takeaways  
 
Even though five cents versus three cents seem small, the resulting 66% price premium 
becomes a major issue as purchase volumes go up.  It costs VoiceDirect nothing to provide 
more minutes, as capacity is unlimited. Providing that there will be no cannibalization of their 
postpaid customer base, there is only upside in matching the competitors’ prices.   
 
Recommended Conclusion 
 
Immediately cut the price to at least the competitor level for repackaging purposes.  Assess 
whether it will be effective for VoiceDirect to go into prepay repackaging market.  (This is 
important since people with bad credit and people under age 18, for example, cannot enter into 
contracts with VoiceDirect.) 
 
At this point, if there is still time, ask the candidate to estimate the impact of his or her 
recommendation, in percentage changes in demand. (tell candidate that elasticity for these type 
of products is approximately -1.25. Candidate should explain what Elasticity is and why it is 
negative. (ε=(ΔDemand/Demand)/ (ΔPrice/Price)) 
