===== PDF p63 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
59 
 
 
Case 17: CPG Company 
 
OVERVIEW 
Firm:       BCG 
Round:    2006 FT, Final 
Content:  Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
A large food and beverage consumer packaged goods company (CPG) is the client.  They have a 
40% market share in traditional CPG channels, like large format grocery.  They have a 17% 
market share in food service.  They hired us to help them grow that food service business.  How 
would you structure that? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
Recommended Approach 
This is really a 3 Cs case.  If you use the 3 C’s, develop questions around them that are relevant 
to the specific question, and probe the interviewer for new, relevant information, then you can 
crack it.  This is not a numbers case.  Some knowledge of marketing and consumer packaged 
goods would be helpful.  Later in the case, using the 4 Ps to help think through the questions 
about how specifically to grow market share would be helpful in generating ideas. 
 
Key Facts 
There’s a lot of additional information in this case.  The interviewee should probe for this 
information because it’s essential for solving the case. 
 
- 
The client has one major competitor in beverage, but no major competitor in their foods 
portfolio.  The beverage portfolio consists of sodas, waters, juices, teas, health drinks, 
and new specialty bottled drinks—no alcoholic beverages.  The food portfolio consists 
primarily of snack foods—for throughout the day (ie, breakfast, lunch, and later).  The 
client’s main competitor is a major beverage company—but they don’t have any sort of 
food portfolio. 
 
- 
The client’s share is 17% across the food service market.  But within this market, the 
market share for the client varies in the different segments and subsegments.  There are 
three primary segments in the food service market: 1) cafeteria/ workplace food service, 
2) restaurants (which is comprised of fast food, slow fast food/ alternative fast food, and 
other), 3) entertainment/ theme park venues, and 4) misc.  Amongst these segments, 
restaurants is definitely the largest—70% of the market.   
 
- 
Within restaurants, there are a few subsegments: 1) fast food (Wendy’s, BK, 
McDonald’s), 2) slow fast food/ alternative fast food (Chipotle, Au Bon Pain, Cosi, 
California Pizza Kitchen Express, Wolfgang Puck’s), and 3) Misc. (corner deli, mom and 


===== PDF p64 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
60 
 
pop, etc.).  The fast food segment is dominated by our major competitor, who has a 70% 
market share in the segment.  Slow fast food/ alternative fast food is a smaller segment, 
but it is growing at 30% a year, as a part of a trend of eating healthier.  
 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee:  I’d like to make sure that I understand the case.  So, our client is a traditional 
CPG, with a beverage and foods portfolio.  Can you tell me a bit more about that portfolio?  I’m 
assuming that they have sodas and juices?  Do they have other types of drinks? 
 
Interviewer: Sure.  The beverage portfolio consists of sodas, waters, juices, teas, health drinks, 
and new specialty bottled drinks—no alcoholic beverages.   
 
Interviewee: What about their food portfolio?  What is that comprised of? 
 
Interviewer: The food portfolio consists primarily of snack foods—for throughout the day (ie, 
breakfast, lunch, and later).  That’s one thing that makes us distinctive from our main 
competitor—we have both a food and beverage portfolio.  Our main competitor only has 
beverages. 
 
Interviewee:  Interesting.  So, they have a pretty comprehensive portfolio.  Can I have  a minute 
to structure my thoughts? 
 
Interviewer: Sure.  Take your time. 
 
(Now the interviewee should take a few minutes to structure the case.  This will require more 
than just laying out a framework but also identifying key questions that will help them drive to an 
answer.) 
 
Interviewee: I would like to know about three main things: 1) customers, 2) our company and 
capabilities, and 3) the competition and how we can differentiate between them.  In those three 
main categories of information, there are a few key questions that I’d like to answer.  This is how 
I might structure it: 
 


===== PDF p65 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
61 
 
Customers
Company
Competitors
•Who are the potential customers in the food service 
market?
¾Cafeteria/ Workplace food service
¾Restaurants—fast food, slow fast food, other?
¾Entertainment venues—movie theaters, theme parks
¾Other?
•What’s in our portfolio?
¾Food portfolio
¾Beverage portfolio
•Do we have any capabilities that are specific to us?
•Who are our competitors?
•What do we have that differentiates us from our 
competition?
•Where are our competitors strong?  Where are we 
stronger than them?  (Mkt. shares?)
 
 
Interviewer:  That’s good.  What would you like to start with first? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, we already talked about our company and portfolio a bit; is there anything 
else that I should know about our company.  Like, do we have any capabilities that our 
competition doesn’t have? 
 
Interviewer: Not really. 
 
Interviewee:  Well, I’d like to know a little more about customers in the market.  I don’t know 
much about the food service market, but I imagine that there’s a lot that falls into the group of 
customers.   
 
Interviewer:  You’re right.  You’ve listed a few.  Why don’t we discuss those. 
 
Interviewee:  Sure.  I imagine that food service includes things like cafeterias, both at schools 
and universities.  And, I know that the company that I worked at before school had a cafeteria—
maybe that as well? 
 
Interviewer:  Yep.  What else do you have? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, then, there’s movie theaters and theme parks—maybe places like bowling 
alleys? 
 
Interviewer:  Sure.  What else? 
 


===== PDF p66 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
62 
 
Interviewee:  Yes, there’s also restaurants.  And then, there might be customers that I’m 
forgetting.  Is there anything else? 
 
Interviewer:  Sure, there’s probably some sort of miscellaneous group—but you’ve covered the 
main ones.  So, of those main three, what do you think the sizes of the segments are? 
 
(The Interviewer is testing the interviewee’s business judgment/ common sense in asking for the 
interviewee’s sense of the sizes of the segments.) 
 
Interviewee: I think that miscellaneous is pretty small.  And then, the entertainment one is also 
pretty small and stable.  But the cafeteria/ workplace one, I imagine that that’s a little bigger—
and maybe it’s growing.  And then, the restaurant one, I bet that’s the largest.  Though, I’m not 
sure how fast it’s growing.   
 
Interviewer: You’re basically right.  The restaurant segment is definitely the largest—it’s about 
70% of the food service market. 
 
Interviewee:  If I think back to the original question of helping them grow their share in the food 
service segment, I think that I would focus on the restaurant segment.  Can you tell me a bit more 
about that segment of the food service market?   
 
Interviewer: Well, what do you think about that segment? 
 
(Part of what the Interviewer is testing here is the interviewee’s ability to use common sense to 
lead the case and see what they can deduce on their own.) 
 
Interviewee:  Well, I imagine that restaurants includes a few subsegments.  For a CPG, high-end 
restaurants are out.  But in the low-end, there’s probably fast food, delis and mom and pop shops, 
and miscellaneous. 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  There’s one big, new one that you’re missing.  It’s referred to as 
“slow fast food.”  It’s new chains with more made-to-order, healthier food.  It’s restaurants like 
Chipotle, Boston Market, Cosi, etc.  It’s part of people’s need to eat healthier. 
 
Interviewee:  Interesting.  I imagine that this new segment is growing a lot faster than the other 
segments.  But it’s small. If I think about the original question of the case, if I was going to try to 
grow market share, I might try to grow it throughout the restaurant segments.  However, before I 
make a recommendation, I’d like to know a bit more about the competition—we haven’t talked 
much about that. 
 
Interviewer:  You’re right.  Well, the competition is pretty fierce in the fast food subsegment.  E 
have one main competitor.  They only make beverages, and they have a 70% market share in fast 
food. 
 


===== PDF p67 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
63 
 
Interviewee:  Wow.  Well, given that, I would focus on the other two segments: this new slow, 
fast food segment and the mom and pop segment. 
 
Interviewer:  Great.  What would you do to try to focus on them and grow your market share 
with them? 
 
(The interviewee might want to take a few seconds to think about the answer to this question.  
It’s kind of the crux of the answer to the case.  Since it’s a marketing question—how to grow 
market share—the 4 Ps come in as a handy framework to use to think through the case.) 
 
Product
Price
Promotion
•Are there customers in the restaurant segment that we’re 
not taking care of right now?  New sub-segments?
•Should we compete on price?  Do we want to compete 
on price? (Price competition could grow our unit share, 
but hurt of $ volume market share—and our profits 
overall)
•Can we cross-promote with our restaurant customers?
•Will cross-promotion help grow restaurant customers’
loyalty to us?
Placement
•Can we offer specialty products/ tailor-made products to 
restaurants?
•Can we offer new product packaging that is specific to our 
restaurant customers?
 
 
Interviewee:  Well, there are a few things that we could to grow our share with these customers.  
In terms of price, well, we could change our price, but I don’t think that we want to compete on 
price.  That could help us grow our unit volume share, but it might hurt our dollar volume share 
and definitely would hurt our profits.  In terms of placement/ distribution, is there a way that we 
can grow our share by distributing to new customers/ locations? 
 
Interviewer:  Maybe.  But we already distribute to a majority of the market.  What else could you 
do to grow share. 
 
Interviewee:  In terms of promotion, maybe they can create partnerships with certain customers 
or customer chains and run cross promotion campaigns—like advertising campaigns, or coupons.  
And in terms of product, maybe they can create customized products for their restaurant 
customers?  Like new packaging?  Specialty sizes, etc? 
 


===== PDF p68 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
64 
 
Interviewer:  Yep.  That’s great.  That’s a good way to grow share.  But can you just quickly give 
me some of the pros and cons of specialty or custom products? 
 
(Here, the Interviewer is testing the interviewee’s ability to identify some business risks with new 
ideas—testing business judgment and risk identification.) 
 
Interviewee:  Well, on the pros side, it would build a special relationship with the customer; it 
might differentiate us from our competition.  On the cons side, our profit margins would 
definitely decrease on custom products.  So, we might grow our share, but not our overall bottom 
line. 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  So, is there anything else—other than custom products or any of the 
ideas that you mentioned—that can help us grow our share in the restaurant segment? 
 
(Here, the Interviewer is looking for a specific answer.  If the interviewee doesn’t get it, don’t 
worry about it.  You can still get the job without getting the answer to this one.) 
 
Interviewee:  Well, when I think about the information that I got early in the case, the only thing 
that I have that really differentiates us from our competition is the fact that we have a food and 
beverage portfolio.  Maybe we can leverage the fact that we can distribute food products and 
beverage products to restaurant customers to grow our market share? 
 
Interviewer:  Yes, that’s right.  So, how would you summarize your recommendation? 
 
Interviewee:  Sure.  The client wants to grow their market share in the food service segment. 
The best way to do that would be to focus on the restaurant segment of the food service market, 
because that’s the largest part of the market—nearly 70%.  Within that, the client should focus 
on the non-fast food segments, as those segments aren’t dominated by our major competitor and 
are still up for grabs.  And they’re growing faster than the traditional fast food segment.  The best 
ways to grow market share within those sub-segments—without hurting the bottom line—would 
be to leverage the breadth of our portfolio, having both food and beverage products to offer 
which our competition does not, and perhaps by making custom products, where it doesn’t hurt 
our profit margins. 
 
 
