===== PDF p55 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
MARKET EXPANSION 
 
 ACQUIRING NEW AIRLINE ROUTE 
 
 
Question: 
 
A major American airline is considering establishing new routes from Tokyo to several sites in the United States.  
Would you recommend that they take this action? 
 
 
Approach: 
 
• 
We are dealing with establishing new routes and not acquiring existing ones. 
 
• 
This case requires a complete examination of the customers and competition. 
 
• 
Customers consist of both business and leisure travelers.  While business travel from Japan to the U.S. has 
been declining at about 25% over the last year, leisure travel has increased at a faster rate.  It is expected 
that leisure travelers will continue to grow at a faster rate than business travelers.  Currently, about 50% of 
all Japanese travelers to the U.S. are leisure travelers. 
 
• 
It is extremely expensive to buy gates at Tokyo’s crowded airport. 
 
• 
As it turns out, competition will come not only from other airlines at Tokyo, but also from a new airport 
that’s being built in Osaka. 
 
• 
Furthermore, Osaka is expected to attract a very high percentage of the leisure travelers. It is very 
inconvenient for leisure travelers to fly out of Tokyo, where there’s heavy congestion and where prices tend 
to be higher due to high gate prices.  It is estimated that the leisure travelers at Tokyo airport could decrease 
by 25-30%. 
 
• 
If our client continues with their plans for buying gates in Tokyo, they will find it difficult to attract the 
growing percentage of leisure travelers needed for their new routes to the U.S.  It probably makes much 
more economic sense to buy gates in Osaka instead. 
 
• 
Another insight is the recognition that Osaka will increase the total number of airport gates in Japan.  The 
intense demand for gates at Tokyo will decrease considerably with the greater supply of gates at Osaka.  
This fact most likely doesn’t change the benefits of buying gates in Osaka.  However, there may also be a 
new opportunity for our client to buy gates cheaply in Tokyo to establish new business traveler routes to 
the U.S. 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 81 
 
