===== PDF p8 =====
CASE 1:  OPTICAL FIBRES (BCG – Round 1)  
                  
 
Our client makes optical fibre (has volume advantages to copper wire) which is mainly used by 
the telecom, cable and mobile phone industries. It’s made in glass strands and rolled onto 25 km 
spools. Their customers (who are generally major Telecoms networks) would buy a huge 
quantity, bundle it up, dig a trench and put the bundle of fibres in the ground. They’ve seen a 
50% decline in revenues, and have recently brought in a new CEO. The new CEO would like to 
know:  
a) Why did revenues drop 50% in one year?  
b) Can he expect an improvement, and if so in what timeframe? 
c) How does our company compare to our competitors? 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Optical fibre is similar to a commodity, so consumers do not purchase by brand and pricing is in    
line with competition. 
• There has been no significant change in supply from the company’s perspective. 
• There are no direct substitutes and no regulation changes during this period. 
• The “usage” of the optical fibres, for voice, data and internet, has actually doubled each year. 
(meaning you would think you’d actually need twice as much each year) 
• Customers are asking for less. 
• No major changes in customer’s industry. Even spread across industries for product sales. 
• Current usage is 5 T/second, but capacity is 100 T/second. 
 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
Why did revenues drop 50% in one year? 
I determined the problem was that because it is such an effort and expense to dig the trenches to put 
the fibre bundles in, the customer does it as infrequently as possible which leads to overcapacity.  
 
Can he expect an improvement? If so when?  
I found out that they buy a year in advance of needing it.  Since usage doubled yearly, I worked out 
that customers would reach capacity in 3.5 years, and therefore we would be impacted for 2.5 years.  
 
The CEO wants a benchmark slide with how we compare to our competitors: what would be the 
main items you’d want to see on that slide?  
I asked for Market Share (leader), Cost (lowest cost), People (no advantage), Customer Base (no 
advantage), Product (no real advantage), and Balance Sheet (highest) 
 
He asked if we could weather the storm or if we were in trouble.  
I said if we had a pretty healthy financial situation, we could weather the storm for 2.5 years but that it 
would be worthwhile looking for other ways to diversify since this would be a cyclic problem.  
 
 
 
 
 
3


===== PDF p9 =====
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
The key to answering this question is understanding what is actually going on in the industry. 
To get to the heart of this issue you could ask: 
 
Clearly our client has lost a significant portion of their revenue. To understand why there are three key 
things I would want to examine. 
• First, what has changed about our Client – we haven’t heard of any major reason why things 
would be going wrong internally but some of the things that I would want to look at are: Have 
they lost key sales personnel with good customer relationships? Have they lost their good 
reputation because of some incident or accident etc? Have there been perceived quality 
problems? Etc 
• Second, I would want to look at our key Competitors – Are they offering a better product? 
(probably not if the industry is commoditized) Are they selling at a lower price? Are they 
offering better service/delivery times etc? Are there now more competitors? Are our 
competitors better placed geographically to meet the needs of our customers? Are their some 
competitors that are doing better than us? If so how do they differ from us? Are they bigger 
and leveraging their scale, etc? 
• Third, I would want to look at the needs of our Customers and whether these have changed. – 
If there is nothing wrong with our product (Client) and our Competitors haven’t suddenly got 
better then the downturn in sales must have something to do with the needs of our Customers. 
What is their current usage? What is their current capacity? What is their anticipated usage? 
What are their purchasing patterns relative to capacity? etc 
 
This structure should drive you to identify the key issue. The way the facts are presented it looks like 
most of the questions on Client and Competitors will yield little return and the richest part of the 
discussion will focus around Customer needs. This should provide the opportunity to discover all of 
the facts about the growth in demand and the capacity constraint currently in place. It could also lead 
to understanding the “lumpy” nature of these capital purchases. 
 
This discussion should also draw out enough information to answer the follow up question on how our 
client compares to its competitors. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
