===== PDF p122 =====
Case 13: Big School Bus Company
Introduction
Introduction
Problem statement narrative
118
You have been approached by a private equity firm trying to decide whether or not to acquire Big School Bus Company. Big School Bus 
Company manufacturers, owns, and operates school buses across the United States. The private equity firm wants you to help them 
estimate the size of the market for school buses and to identify ways in which you might able to extract more value from Big School Bus 
Company, if acquired. 
Overview for the interviewer
Let the candidate begin by performing a market size estimate. Candidates should define the target market, determine how large the 
market currently is (volume), and identify what portion of the market Big School Bus Company could be reasonably expected to capture, 
based on present (and future expected) market share.
Things candidates should consider:
• Segmenting school children into those who: a) walk; b) are driven to school by parents; and c) take the school bus
• How many children take school buses every day
H
h
l b
ld b
d d
ll h
hild
• How many school buses would be needed to transport all these children
• That school buses can make multiple trips every morning and afternoon
• That only a fraction of school buses are replaced every year (candidate should make a reasonable assumption for school bus lifetime 
– 10-15 years; thus 1/10 to 1/15 of the total school bus market is “addressable”) 
FYI: every school day, about 500,000 school buses transport ~26 million school children to and from school. Use this information to help 
y
y,
,
p
p
steer the candidate back on track if they are orders of magnitude off. 
NOTE: Technically there are other uses for school buses beyond simply transporting children to and from school. Depending on how time 
goes, you may want to ignore this aspect and have the candidate focus on a more limited definition of the market to be sized.


===== PDF p123 =====
Case 13: Big School Bus Company
Market sizing
I f
ti
t b
id d (if
k d)
119
Market sizing
Information to be provided (if asked)
• The school bus manufacturing industry is dominated by two players. Big School Bus Company is the larger of the two with about 45% 
market share (by volume). 
• 40% of school buses are owned and operated by independent companies, such as Big School Bus Company. These independent 
companies often contract their services out to school districts. The rest are owned and operated by school districts themselves.
• IF the candidate identifies him or herself as not having been part of the US public school system and specifically asks for clarification, 
you can tell the candidate that around 60% of US schoolchildren take school buses to school every day. 
• Average school bus capacity is 20 passengers for smaller school buses and 70 passengers for larger school buses. 
• 80% of schools buses are larger school buses. 20% are smaller school buses.


===== PDF p124 =====
Case 13: Big School Bus Company
Extracting more value
O
i
f
th i t
i
120
Extracting more value
Overview for the interviewer
How would the firm extract more value (additional profits) from Big School Bus Company?
Candidates should then setup a framework that allows them to explore both sides of the profit tree (revenue and costs).
Before the candidate gets too involved with their framework and analysis, the interviewer should ask the candidate whether their intuition 
tells them that more value can be extracted from the manufacturing or the operations/services side of the industry. Candidates should 
realize that the school bus industry is in a relatively mature phase, and most of the market has already been saturated. Thus, operations 
and services are likely to be more attractive, in general.
There are many possibilities that candidates can address in operations/services, and this is a chance for the candidate to be creative. 
Several different areas may be explored, and sample ideas follow on the next slide.


===== PDF p125 =====
Case 13: Big School Bus Company
Question 2: Extracting more value
Sample ideas
121
Question 2: Extracting more value
Revenue – explore different business models
• Customers could be the school districts themselves.
• Customers could be businesses looking for mass transport services (but unwilling to pay for coach buses); this could potentially
generate a lot more revenue for Big School Bus Company during hours when school buses might otherwise be sitting idle
• Customers could also be wealthy parents willing to pay for private “mass” transportation services (perhaps where public school buses
Customers could also be wealthy parents willing to pay for private mass  transportation services (perhaps where public school buses 
are lacking, bus stops are too far from homes, or where public school buses are of less than suitable quality to these parents).
• School children tend to take school buses just before their parents head off to work and before their parents get home from work. 
Thus, Big School Bus Company may be able to allocate buses to transporting employees to work (think the Google shuttle concept).
• Service differentiation. For example, provide WiFi so that students can complete their homework while riding the school bus and 
h
b l
d if di t
t d b i t
t b
d
t
t i
t
perhaps be less rowdy if distracted by internet-based entertainment.
• From a price perspective, Big School Bus Company could contract out services for a flat fee per year. Or they could charge per 
passenger. Candidates would ideally discuss the issues of willingness-to-pay versus cost-plus (and other) pricing methods, as well as 
which business models would better support a “fee-per-person” pricing model. 
Costs
When it comes to school districts sourcing buses (and sometimes bus services), school districts may choose to put out contracts to 
competitive bids. Oftentimes the decision point will be who has the lowest bid that still meets the quality metrics and requirements 
specified by the school district. 
• In order to submit a low bid, Big School Bus Company should also examine its cost structure. Candidates may delve into the fixed and
In order to submit a low bid, Big School Bus Company should also examine its cost structure. Candidates may delve into the fixed and 
variable cost components of different proposed options for creating value. For instance, fixed costs could include the buses themselves, 
the internet connectivity hardware and contracts with internet service providers, the corporate headquarters/dispatch center, etc.. 
Variable costs would include fuel and hourly wages for (potentially unionized) bus drivers.


===== PDF p126 =====
Case 13: Big School Bus Company
Conclusion
C
l i
122
Conclusion
Conclusion
Candidates should recognize that while the problem narrative focuses mostly on the questions of market sizing and extracting value, the 
real substantive issue is whether or not to recommend an acquisition of Big School Bus Company. Top candidates will make such a 
recommendation at the end, without prompting. 
If a candidate does not make such a recommendation without prompting, ask them at the end of the case what they would recommend 
and why (the “Our client’s managing director is coming; what do you say to him/her?” executive summary). 
