===== PDF p34 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
30  
5.6. 
Bus Operator 
Length: Short (15 Minutes) 
 
Problem: 
Our client is a US bus transport operator maintaining routes between cities. The company 
has lost money for the past several years and over-operated routes as well as recent route 
additions are suspected to be responsible.  A new CEO has now taken charge and 
determined that the company needs to aggressively cut costs in order to return to 
profitability. How would you approach the problem? 
Information To Be Provided If Requested: 
1. Routes are of three types: short, medium or long.  More than half of the revenue 
comes from long distance trips 
2. The company has a substantial real estate investment in terminals 
3. The prior CEO focused on top line; instituted plans like anywhere pickup 
4. Cash position is tight – the company had a recent brush with bankruptcy  
5. Its equipment is quite old 
6. The largest cost for a bus company is fuel 
Solution: 
The candidate is expected to use a profitability framework, and focus more on costs than 
other aspects because of the nature of the problem.  
Costs can be divided into Fixed and Variable Costs. 
 
Fixed Costs: Buses, stations and other buildings, salaried employees, etc. 
 
Variable Costs: Gas, hourly employees, maintenance (debatable whether variable) 
Costs could be cut on possibly all of the above areas. Here are some specific suggestions: 
• Determine which routes are profitable and cut back on the unprofitable routes – a 
good metric to use would be the load factor 
• Change routes in a way that can improve the load factor 
• Think about oil contracts to protect against oil price fluctuations 
• Lease new equip. to decrease maintenance costs, downtime, and fuel efficiency 
• Reconsider “anywhere pickup” and utilize more freeways to improve schedules 
and utilization of equipment (bonus point) 
The other part of cost cutting would be to compare the services provided to customers 
with what they really want.  For example, there may be costs involved with extra terminal 
services or increasing leg room on new seats that are not valued by consumers.  
Essentially, the offering must be realigned with customer needs. 
Follow-Up Question: If the company figures out 25 new routes that may be profitable, 
how one would go about starting service on those routes. 
Possible Response to Follow-Up Question: 
The company would need to look at the operating costs per route, competition on each 
route, whether the company’s infrastructure could support the new routes, and what 
potential customers on these routes want (they are likely not riders on the company’s 
existing routes.) 
 
