===== PDF p52 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 48 - 
Case 11: R & D Productivity 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: BCG  
Round: 2008 Summer, Second 
Content: Qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is the head of the R & D department of a pharmaceutical company. He wants 
us to advise him on how to improve the productivity in the R & D department 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: Explain a good structure to answering the case.  Suggest a 
possible framework and a solution. 
 
Key facts:   
Facts that are disclosed during the course of the case: 
 
There are basically several steps leading from the discovery of the molecule to the 
launch.  
 
It normally takes about 10 years to discover a drug and get it approved.  
 
The drugs are usually patent protected 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer:  There are basically several steps leading from the discovery of the 
molecule to the launch. It normally takes about 10 years to discover a drug and get it 
approved.  
 
 
 
 
 
How would you measure the productivity of the R & D department? 
 
Interviewee:  I would look at the success of the R & D department in terms of the drugs 
discovered.  
 
Interviewer: If you had to measure the productivity in terms of a formula that you could 
present to the shareholders, what would that be?  
Preclinical 
(testing on 
Animals) 
Phase 1  
(testing 
on 
humans)
Phase 2  
(testing on 
humans) 
Phase 3  
(testing on 
humans) 
 
Approval  
&  
Launch  
 
Discovery 
(discovery 
of the 
molecule)


===== PDF p53 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 49 - 
 
Interviewee:  The formula would look like this: 
 
NPV of future cashflows 
of successful drugs 
- 
R & D cost of 
all drugs 
R&D cost of all drugs 
 
Interviewer:  What are the big drivers to increase the productivity ? 
 
Interviewe:  Let’s look at each aspect of the formula that we have written 
 
NPV of future cashflows .  
The big drivers of the NPV of the future cashflows are as follows: 
 
Quality of the compound 
Quality of the compound is the most important factor that influences the cash 
flows. Say Lipitor for instance – it’s the highest quality compound that’s out 
there in the market and its capturing record revenues year after year. Its 
important to ensure that sufficient tests have been done during the test phase 
to ensure that there are no side effects to the drugs.  
 
Length of research 
As it takes around 10 years to discover the drug, reducing the length of time 
taken will increase the patent time thus maximizing our return 
 
Marketing & Sales promotion efforts 
While this aspect is beyond the hands of our client, its an important element of 
the future cashflows. The sales and marketing team are responsible to build 
awareness and demand for the product.  
 
R & D cost of all drugs 
The 2nd part of the formula is the cost of the producing drugs. Its important to minimize 
the cost of research to have the maximum productivity. That can be done in the following 
manner: 
 
Strict controls and parameters at each stage of the development  
No drug which has a likelihood of failing the stage should be passed to the 
next stage. This ensures that costs of failure are kept to the minimum. If the 
controls are not strict, then a lot more money would be spent on patient testing 
and the drugs end up getting rejected in the later stages. This not only wastes 
money but also valuable time which could have been spent on another drug. 
 
Quality scientists 
In order to control the costs of R & D and make it more productive, we need 
high quality scientists.  
 
Acquire compounds developed successfully upto certain stages 
Due to the length of time a complete in-house discovery takes, it might be 
worthwhile to explore outside and either acquire or obtain partnerships with 


===== PDF p54 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 50 - 
other companies for promising drugs. This diversifies the risk as well as may 
yield a good return 
 
Interviewer:  Any other ways to increase productivity? What about the R & D 
organization? 
 
Interviewee:  We need to keep the scientists sufficiently motivated as it’s a very long 
process before their drug is successful. We need to ensure that they do not move 
organizations quickly leading to loss of critical talent. 
 
Interviewer:  What is the biggest challenge that the R & D head faces today? 
 
Interviewee:  The biggest challenge the   R & D head faces today is on evaluation of 
scientist teams. What kind of measurable metrics to set and how to evaluate the scientist 
against it. 
 
Interviewer:  What is the biggest mistake that an R & D head could make? 
 
Interviewee:  The biggest mistake an R & D head could make is to measure the scientists 
based on the number of drugs they pass from one stage to the next. This will motivate 
them to pass certain drugs which maybe borderline or even not fit to be passed to the next 
stage. This increases the R & D costs significantly and as mentioned before wastes time 
that could have been spent on other products.  
 
Their incentive structure should be based on compliance, how strictly they have adhered 
to the guidelines. Any product that fails at a later stage and where the cause can be 
directly attributed to a prior stage should impact their performance. 
 
Interviewer:  Excellent! Lets summarize and recommend  
 
Interviewee:  We have seen the different stages of drug discovery and know that it takes 
10 years to discover a drug. We have also looked at the drivers of productivity which are 
mainly the future cashflows from successful drugs and R & D investment in all drugs. In 
order to increase the productivity I would recommend that we take steps to  
 
Shorten the length of research so that we get maximum patent protection time to 
maximize our returns. 
 
Establish strict guidelines at each stage of the process to ensure that failures are 
discovered more quickly  
 
Change the incentive structure of the scientists so that the metrics for evaluating 
them is compliance driven and not based on the number of drugs passed to the 
next stage. 
