===== PDF p63 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 59 - 
Case 14: Mayor of Youtown 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: McKinsey 
Round: 2007 Full-Time, First  
Content: Qualitative and Quantitative  
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Your client is a mayor of Youtown, population 500,000. Recently the town has 
experienced a population decline which has negatively impacted the economy. When the 
mayor ran for election his political platform was based on economic growth so this is an 
issue that is of great concern for him. He has hired McKinsey to understand what he can 
do to revitalize the town? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: There’s no real framework to use here. The key is to be 
structured throughout, to prioritize your thoughts, and to be sure to be able to understand 
the interdependencies of the population growth and unemployment rate. 
 
Key facts:   
 Population 500,000 
 Unemployment rate 8% 
 Population growth of 5% 
 Ave company employs 500 people 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer: First question is, What could cause a declining population? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, the most obvious reason would be jobs or employment.  But, it could 
also be quality of life issues directly related to city services, like crime, schools, roads, 
and so forth.  It could also be quality of life issues related to other issues, like culture.  
Finally, it could be cost of living issues for the residents. 
 
Interviewer: Great. Let’s say the mayor has done some preliminary research and the 
reason people are leaving is because of lack of employment opportunities. What reasons 
can you think of for why companies are leaving Youtown? 
 


===== PDF p64 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 60 - 
Interviewee:  I think one reason would be financial. Perhaps the tax rates in Youtown are 
too high, or property costs are too high, or labor costs are too high. Another reason would 
be around talent. It might be that the companies can’t find the kind of skilled labor pool 
they need. A third reason could be around location – it could be that as commerce 
changes Youtown is no longer in a convenient location for companies to conduct their 
business.  
 
Interviewer: Ok, so how can the mayor drive business growth and create opportunities to 
increase population? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, first, let’s approach the business growth. The mayor could identify 
what all the problems are that companies have and define strategies to address them. For 
example, if companies are leaving because of financial issues then the mayor can 
consider lowering the tax rate or give tax incentives or offer property tax benefits. He can 
also perhaps offer labor subsidies to entice companies to come back to Youtown. If the 
reason is around talent, then the mayor can implement a training program to give the 
labor pool the skills needed to be attractive to potential employers. If location is an issue 
for companies, the mayor can consider implementing a transportation subsidy or offer 
transportation services to help them conduct their business.  
 
On the second issue of creating opportunities for population growth, I would think about 
it in terms of cost of living and quality of life. On the cost of living side, the mayor can 
consider reducing tax rates, property tax rates, and other issues that make the cost of 
living more expensive in Youtown. On the quality of life side, the mayor can address 
issues like transportation (making it easier to get around), improving the environment, 
creating more outdoor recreation spaces, creating more cultural attractions. Also, the 
mayor can also create a promotional campaign to attract more people to the city. 
 
Interviewer: Shifting gears, how many employers would the mayor need to attract in 
order to increase population growth by 5% and decrease unemployment by 3%? 
 
Interviewee:  Ok, well, the current population is 500,000. What is the current 
unemployment rate and how many employees does one company employ? 
 
Interviewer: One company employs 500 people and the current unemployment rate is 
8%. 
 
Interviewee:  And the unemployment rate affects only people who can be employed? 
 
Interviewer:Yes.  
 
Interviewee: So the current population is 500,000 and assuming the average life span is 
80 years, we can segment the population like this: 0-20, 20-40-40-60, 60-80. I’ll make the 


===== PDF p65 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 61 - 
assumption that the working age population is from 20-60. Assuming an even distribution 
then we have 250,000 of employable people. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s say it’s 300,000. 
 
Interviewee: Ok, so currently the unemployment rate is 8% which means that there are 
24,000 unemployed people. We want to reduce that to 5% of the new population. The 
new population would be 1.05x the current population. I’ll assume that the growth is 
evenly distributed across all age segments so I can apply the 5% growth to the working 
segment. So 300,000 x 1.05 = 315,000 people. The new unemployment rate would be 5% 
of this new number which is 315,000 x .05 = 15,750 unemployed people. So the people 
who need to be employed is the difference which is 24,000 – 15,750 = ~ 8,000.  
 
Now, the additional 15,000 people from the population growth also need to be employed 
so it’s 8,000 + 15,000 = 23,000. You mentioned that each company employs 500 people 
so 23,000/500 = 46. The town will need 46 new companies to accommodate the 3% 
decrease in unemployment and 5% increase in population. 
 
Interviewer: Good. So what can the mayor do to attract businesses to the town? 
 
Interviewee: The mayor can consider lowering the tax rate or give tax incentives or offer 
property tax benefits. He can also perhaps offer labor subsidies to entice companies to 
come back to Youtown. If the reason is around talent, then the mayor can implement a 
training program to give the labor pool the skills needed to be attractive to potential 
employers. If location is an issue for companies, the mayor can consider implementing a 
transportation subsidy or offer transportation services to help them conduct their 
business.  
 
Interviewer: Let’s say that I am the mayor and you have to summarize your 
recommendation what would you say? 
 
Interviewee: (Summarize the case and give the recommendation) 
