===== PDF p160 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
156 
 
35. Blue Chips (Deloitte R2, Industrial Goods, New Product) 
Stem: Our client is called Blue Chips. They run a silicon manufacturing business, specifically making the 
quartz that goes into wafers. They are thinking about expanding into the wafer manufacturing business. 
Wafers come in two diameter sizes – 6 inches and 8 inches. It would cost our client about $200M to 
expand their factory. Demand in the industry is expected to grow. Should Blue Chips get into the wafer 
business? If so, what size of wafer should they produce? 
 
Phase 1: Industry Landscape 
 
Give the candidate a few minutes to write out the structure. It should include industry landscape, 
investment size, expected revenue, and cost. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s start by calculating the market size for wafers. 
 
Hand candidate exhibit. 
 
 
Candidate to calculate total 6-inch wafer market size of $1.5B and 8 inch wafer market size of $1.68B. 
Total market size of $3.18B, round to $3.2B. 
 
Candidate: That’s a sizable market. In order to understand more about the attractiveness of each type, I 
would need to know more about the competitive landscape. 
 
Interviewer: I have some data on that. For the six-inch wafer, the leading competitor has $700M in 
revenues, the second $350M and the third $220M. The rest of the market is fragmented. For the eight- 
inch model, there is only one big player with revenue of $1.4B. The rest is fragmented as well. 
 
Candidate to calculate how much share of market is taken up by the top 3 competitors percentage-wise 
and give initial take on this number. Regarding the eight-inch wafer market, it seems challenging as it is 
near monopolized. The candidate should ask for data on profitability of each type before making any 
concrete decision. If he or she doesn’t, prompt the candidate to do so. 
 
Candidate: It seems like a six-inch market is more attractive, but it will depend on how profitable each 
business line is. Do you happen to have data on that? 


===== PDF p161 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
157 
 
Interviewer: I have some data on the profitability. It turns out that we are looking at 7% for 6 inch wafers 
and 15% for the 8 inch ones. Would that change your opinion of the situation? 
 
Candidate should develop a view point on any of the two sizes with considerations on potential 
profitability and competitive landscape. 
 
Interviewer: Do you think this is a good investment? 
 
Candidate: It surely is profitable, and the demand growth is expected to be strong. I think it will all 
depend on how big of a market share we can potentially get. 
 
Interviewer: Any idea on how to maximize that? 
 
Candidate should list out a few ideas on how to enter the new market successfully. There is no need to 
ask for calculation here, this is meant to be a brainstorming exercise. 
 
Interviewer: I like your ideas. Let’s move on to choosing actual processing methodologies. 
Phase 2: Analyzing Different Manufacturing Processes 
Interviewer: There are two different ways to produce wafers – the Cz process and the Ky process. When 
it comes to the 6-inch Cz process, one can produce a high yield of chips, the process has been around  
for over 20 years and there are five other manufacturers producing the product in this fashion. The 8-inch 
Cz process has a very high yield, two other manufacturers are producing chips this way, it requires a 
complicated process with a high tech burning to finely develop each chip. The 6-inch Ky process involves 
low yields and is used by many other competitors. The 8-inch Ky process has low yields, is similarly made 
to the 6 inch Ky process without any high tech burning and two other manufacturers are producing chips 
in this fashion. Which process should they use for each chip size, the Cz or Ky process? 
 
Regardless of which product the candidate chooses, he/she should identify the Cz process as the best 
way to produce chips given its competitive advantages. The candidate should also try to explore the cost 
differences between the two options. Feel free to say there is none. 
 
Interviewer: Our client’s CEO is walking in now. What is your final recommendation for her? 
