===== PDF p50 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
46  
5.14. Private-Label Cookies 
Length: Long (45 Minutes) 
 
Problem: 
• Your client is a US-based manufacturer of branded cookies (cookies that carry the 
name of the manufacturer) 
• Recently private label cookies (those carrying the name of the retailer) have emerged 
and threatened branded cookies 
• Private label cookies emerged five years ago 
• Two and one-half years ago they made up 10% of the overall cookie market (brand 
being the other 90%) 
• Today they make up approximately 20% of the overall cookie market (i.e., there has 
been a steady, linear increase of private label portion of the overall cookie market 
during the past five years) 
• The overall cookie market has been relatively flat over the past five years 
• Private label cookies are made by the same manufacturers who make branded cookies, 
they are just sold under the name of the retailer 
• There are essentially three major competitors to consider: 
o 
Your client, who makes only branded cookies 
o 
A second major player, that makes both branded cookies and supplies cookies 
for private labelers 
o 
A collection of small outfits, that make both branded cookies and supply 
private labelers 
• Distribution occurs primarily through one of two types of outlets: 
• Grocery outlets: all grocers sell branded cookies, most also carry their own private 
label cookies. This represents approximately 90% of total cookie sales 
• Mass merchandisers (ex. Walmart, Sam’s, etc.): sell only branded cookies 
 
Question: 
• How large would you estimate the overall U.S. cookie market to be in terms of $? 
• How large of a threat do you believe the trend in private label cookie sales to be to 
your client? 
• Based on your assessment, what is an appropriate strategy for your client to follow? 
 
Solution: 
The first question, estimating the size of the U.S. cookie market, has no right or wrong 
answer. It is a test of a candidate’s ability to make reasonable assumptions and work 
quickly with numbers on an “order of magnitude” level. One acceptable response would 
be to estimate the number of U.S. households, estimate household consumption over 
some period of time, estimate the average cost of a bag of cookies, and project out for 
one year. In this case, after an estimate has been made, the candidate would be told to 
assume the market size is $1Billion to simplify any future calculations. As stated in the 
upfront information, the market is assumed to have been flat for the past five years. 
 


===== PDF p51 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
47  
The second question is more involved. It involves determining to what extent your client 
is threatened by the increasing percent of the overall cookie market represented by 
private label sales. To better answer this question information should be gathered 
pertaining to what is driving the demand for private label cookies, to what extent this has 
already affected your client’s sales, and what the likelihood is for the trend to continue.  
The following are questions and answers that would be provided in an interview scenario. 
 
What are the sales trends for the client over the past five years? 
Your client’s sales have been flat at $600M for the time frame of five to two and one-half 
years ago. Over the past two and one-half years, sales have decreased steadily down to a 
present level of $560MM. 
 
How has market share of the private label segment been split over the past five years 
between your client’s main competitor and the other smaller players? 
The smaller players combined had 100% of the private label sub segment five years ago.  
Two and one-half years ago your client’s main competitor began supplying private 
labelers. Today, this main competitor owns 40% of the private label sub segment, the 
smaller players own the remaining 60% 
 
How has market share of the branded segment been split over the past five years? 
Your client held 60% of this segment five years ago, 67% two and one-half years ago and 
70% today. Its main competitor held 30% five years ago, 25% two and one-half years ago 
and 23% today. The combined smaller players owned 10% five years ago, 8% two and 
one-half years ago and 7% today. 
 
Analysis of the above information tells a very important story. The private label segment 
was launched five years ago by the smaller players. As private label first cut into the 
branded segment, it came at the expense of your client’s main competitor and the smaller 
players, not your client. In response to this, your client’s main competitor entered into the 
private label segment two and one-half years ago. This further hurt their own sales and 
those of the smaller players, but also began to hurt your client’s sales. Additional 
information is required to understand what is driving the demand for private label cookies 
 
How does the quality of a private label cookie compare to that of a branded cookie? 
Consumer studies have shown that there is a noticeable difference in taste, texture and 
quality in favor of the branded cookies 
 
At the manufacturing level, what is the difference in cost of production and price between 
branded and private label products? 
It costs approximately $1.50 to manufacture a bag of private label cookies which will sell 
for $2.00  to retailers. It costs approximately $2.00 to manufacture a bag of branded 
cookies which will sell for $2.75. 
  
How do the same numbers translate at the retail level? 
A retailer, paying $2.00 for private label cookies can sell that product for $2.50. The 
$2.75 bag of branded cookies can be sold for $3.50. 


===== PDF p52 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
48  
 
The key finding is that from a cost-price-margin perspective it is advantageous for both 
the manufacturers and the retailers, with all else equal, to sell a bag of branded cookies. 
Other factors must be contributing to the demand for private label cookies. Think about 
the incentives at each level in the chain (manufacturer, retailer, consumer). The following 
questions can help fill in details 
 
Have any of the manufacturers been able to gain additional shelf space for branded 
products by supplying grocers with private label products? 
No 
 
Has their been excess capacity at your client, its main competitor or the smaller 
competitors that has been used up through the manufacturing of private label products? 
There was some excess capacity at the smaller competitors and your client’s main 
competitor (your client is unsure as to how much).. There is little excess capacity 
anywhere in the industry today. 
. 
Has your client’s relationship with its retailers suffered as a result of it not supplying 
private label products? 
Not noticeably 
 
Are grocery stores using private labels in other food categories? 
Yes, there has been a major push by grocery stores to populate shelves with private labels 
 
Is competition increasing or decreasing among grocers? 
Generally increasing. Grocer chains are expanding and the number of grocers to be found 
serving a given area has generally increased over the past five years 
 
What general macroeconomic trends have occurred over the past five years? 
The economy has been slowing over the past five years. There is concern about recession 
 
The above information begins to expose a clearer story. A number of factors have 
contributed to the emergence of the private label segment: manufacturer’s interest in 
utilizing excess capacity, grocer’s desire to sell products with their name on it (they may 
believe this creates return customers in an increasing competitive environment), 
consumers concerns about a troubled economy (price vs. quality tradeoffs).  
 
At this point the candidate would be encouraged to state what they believe the magnitude 
of the private label threat to be to the client. There is no right answer. One can argue 
either way.   
 
If the threat is seen as high, the likely recommendation is for your client to begin 
supplying private label products. The candidate should recognize that in competing in the 
private label segment, the basis of competition is primarily cost. At the same time, the 
client’s branded product should be protected. The following tactics might prove 
appropriate: 


===== PDF p53 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
49  
 
• Seek to wring costs out of all phases of the operation 
• Utilize all existing excess capacity 
• Gain maximum product knowledge as quickly as possible 
• Understand low cost positions on product ingredients and mix 
• Review process improvement/ manufacturing efficiency opportunities 
• Undertake overhead reduction efforts (Any of these points could be discussed in great 
detail) 
• Ensure there is no customer confusion between private label offering and branded 
product 
• Seek partnering agreements with retailers 
• Joint advertising and promotions 
• Explore deals with mass merchandisers to enter private labels (remember, mass 
merchandisers presently sell no private label) 
 
If the threat is seen as low, the likely recommendation is for your client to stay with 
branded cookies only. The candidate should recognize that in competing in the branded 
segment the basis of competition is one of differentiation. Additionally, your client 
should do all it can to halt or reverse the momentum of the private label segment. The 
following tactics might prove useful: 
 
• Pursue a maximum differentiation strategy 
• Invest in brand image to support premium price 
• Make it difficult to copy product: innovate wisely through product advances, smart 
product line extensions, frequent changes to the product 
• Manage price gap: explore price increases where appropriate (Again, any of these 
points could be discussed in great detail) 
• Explore exclusive partnering with mass merchandisers 
• Consider alternative distribution channels 
• Seek partnering agreements with grocers regarding branded products 
• Educate grocers as available 
• Customers who buy private labels are the most price sensitive. They also tend to be 
the least loyal customers and spend less per store visit. 
• Grocers’ financial stake in private label products extends beyond the product margins. 
There is lost profit from branded products that could occupy the same shelf space, 
advertising costs of the private label products, etc. 
 
Key Takeaways: 
 
This case has no right or wrong answer. It forces the candidate to take a stand in a “grey” 
situation and defend it. It also provides a large amount of data upfront which the 
candidate must quickly sort through and determine what is important and what is not. The 
key is to understand the story behind the data. How did the private label segment emerge? 
What is driving it? How has it affected manufacturers, retailers and consumers? 
