===== PDF p56 =====
15.) Fruit Juice (Bain, Round 1) 
Stem 
Bain is serving a private equity client thinking of purchasing a fresh fruit juice manufacturer. 
The company operates on the West Coast and serves the high end health food market. 
Currently servings are in 16 oz bottles. The juice is sold in high-end delis, cafes such as 
Starbucks, and large upscale grocery chains such as Whole Foods. Last year they had $90 
million in revenues and they have been growing at 15% for the past 3 years. They have 
strong sales and marketing teams and a strong brand name. The private equity company 
wants us to identify whether the company is an attractive acquisition. What are some things 
you would look into? 
Phase 1: Structuring the problem 
Behind the scenes: First part should be broad. Allow the candidate to brainstorm. 
Interviewer: How would you think about evaluating this opportunity? 
Possible answers: Important issues to hit: 
• Industry dynamics: size, growth, drivers of purchases, trends, competitors' market 
share, 
• New entrants, customers 
• Margins: price, cost structure of the firm (compare to competitors), possible future 
changes in the cost structure due to outside forces 
• Private Equity Fit: Is the price fair? Is there an exit strategy? How does the potential 
acquisition fit with the current portfolio, and would there be any synergies? 
Phase 2: Digging deeper in industry dynamics 
Interviewer: First let's look at the industry dynamics. The high end juice market in the US is 
$1 B. Our client is the third largest presence in the industry. The number 1 and 2 players have 
70% of the market. The market overall is growing at 10% annually. What are the one or two 
most relevant pieces of information you'd like to have about the industry landscape? 
Possible Answers: 
• Are the two top players only operating on the west coast or are they nationwide? 
• How have they been able to capture such a big share? Is it because they've been in the 
market longer, (our target looks like a more recently established company given it only 
operates on the west coast) or because their product is better? 
Interviewer: (give the following information requested) The two top players operate 
nationwide. They have been in the market for longer than the acquisition target. 
Key Insight: The target company has been able to be number three even though it is 
competing with bigger national players. If it goes national, it has the potential to be a big 
~ 
.Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~;~,I.?:.~ Club 
2010-2011 1st Year Case Book 
102 


===== PDF p57 =====
. '. 
player because it's been growing faster than the industry. Our target's growth numbers 
suggest that its product is comparable to that of the top players and would be successful in 
the new markets. 
Phase 3: Private Equity Fit 
Behind the scenes: Now come back to the acquisition part of the structure. Guide 
the conversation to a point where the candidate asks the following question: 
Candidate: Before I dig deeper does the client have anything in their portfolio that 
could generate synergies? 
Interviewer: Yes, they own a low end soda and bottle water manufacturer makes private labels 
in US and Canada. The private labels are sold at retailers like Walmart and CostCo. 
Key Insights: (guide the conversation to make sure that the Candidate hits on most of these) 
Synergies usually come from manufacturing, distribution channels, marketing etc. In terms of 
manufacturing, there probably aren't big synergies because the manufacturing of high-end 
juices is not similar to sodas (different kinds of ingredients, markets, processes, quality 
standards). 
Then one might think of trying to sell juice in these channels because there are existing 
relationships BUT I think this would hurt the company in two ways: First, the placement 
of a high end product in a low end retailer it would hurt the brand image. Second, 
retailers like Walmart will use their buyer power to try and push prices down. 
Also, the competencies of already-owned sales and marketing teams don't line up with this 
business. 
Interviewer: So, what is your overall feeling about this acquisition's potential for synergies 
(just make sure that there is a clear wrap-up for this section before proceeding to the next)? 
Candidate: The company itself seems promising, but in terms of working with other 
companies in the portfolio, I see no obvious synergies. 
Phase 4: Company Profitability 
Interviewer: Okay, we know this is a growing company, but now let's look more 
closely at profitability. COGS are 75 cents per bottle, manufacturing is 20% of 
revenue, sales and marketing is $15M, distribution is $30M. Each bottle sells for 
$2.50. 
Candidate: 
Revenue 
COGS 
..-.... Managemenf-
UlIIIIIII Consulting 
~~!~!~:.~ Club 
~90M 
~90M/$2.5 = 36M bottles x $0.75 = 27M 
2010-2011 1 st Year Case Book 
103 
I 
I 


===== PDF p58 =====
Man ufacturing 
$90M x 0.2 = IBM 
Sales/Marketing 
$15M 
Distribution 
$30M 
Profit 
$01 
Key Insight: They are not making a profit. We could look at some ways to improve this . 
. Interviewer: How would you go about doing that? 
Possible Answer: I'd look at it from two perspectives, increasing revenue and decreasing 
costs. 
Interviewer: Let's brainstorm. What are some ways to cut costs? 
Candidate: (as many of these as possible should be hit on) 
• Consolidate suppliers - centralize procurement 
• Automate the factory - increase efficiency 
• Change packaging to make it lighter without hurting the high end brand image -decreases 
fuel spending and thus distribution costs 
• Reducing employees (especially higher ranking ones) 
• Get rid of less profitable juice flavors through profitability analysis and identify the 
lines that we could let go. There would also be a potential to use shelf space to sell more 
of the profitable types. 
Interviewer: Good. Now, what ideas do you have about increasing revenues? 
Candidate: Look at price. We are selling this at $2.5, what's the competitor's price? (make 
sure the candidate asks; otherwise there won't be grounds upon which to reach a real 
conclusions) 
Interviewer: Also $2.5. Would you raise prices? 
Possible Answer: (others are acceptable if backed up by good logic and ideas, but this is 
probably the best) No, because there are more established comparable products with the 
same price this is a bad idea. We would either loose market share or potentially spark a 
price war which would hurt margins. But we could look at some increased distribution 
channel penetration. Given the product's high image we could go into hotels, catering 
companies, restaurants, etc. 
Recommendation 
Interviewer: So do we tell them that this is an attractive acquisition or not? 
Behind the scenes: The key here is to be succinct. But overall, this is an attractive target. 
Though the company is currently not making profits, there are areas to cut costs and increase 
revenue and the company is growing faster than the industry. 
........ Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~;~I.?::.~ Club 
2010-2011 1 st Year Case Book 
104 
