===== PDF p27 =====
Case 3: Verizon Security Services 
Mercer, 2nd Round 
 
About This Case 
 
This case was given by Mercer in second-round interviews.  This is a broad, qualitative 
strategy case and was given in a very open and conversational manner.  No hard data was 
provided – instead, the interviewer asked the candidate to come up with assumptions and 
estimates to drive the case forward.  Therefore, there is no “right” answer, but the 
candidate must be able to come up with reasonable assumptions and then follow them 
logically to a conclusion.   
 
The Problem 
 
Verizon is the nation’s largest provider of local telephone services.  They are considering 
entering the home security market.  Should they? 
 
Information Gathering 
 
Read this information well before you give the case.  Give this case in an open-ended 
manner.  Make the candidate come up with his/her own assumptions and estimates for 
everything.  One set of reasonable assumptions is listed below – use these to steer the 
candidate back on track if they seem to be off the reservation.   
 
Market Size – If the candidate asks for the size of the market, make him/her come up 
with assumptions and calculate the total market size.  A sample calculation based on 
sample assumptions follows: 
 
Total Households in US: 100M 
% Households Serviced by Verizon: 50% 
% Households That Can Afford Service: 50% 
Annual Subscription Price:  $250 
Total Addressable Market:  100M x 50% x 50% x $250 = $6.25B 
 
Cost Structure – Ask the candidate to discuss what the cost structure might be for 
Verizon to enter this market.  What are the fixed costs?  Variable costs?  Does Verizon 
have a cost advantage over other players? 
 
Good Answer:  The business has very little fixed cost beyond the infrastructure 
already installed in potential customers’ homes (i.e. the existing phone wiring).  
Customer would need door / window / motion sensors installed, which could be done 
by a third-party installer and billed to the customer at cost + markup and owned by 
the customer.   
 


===== PDF p28 =====
Variable costs are also very small – essentially just the cost to maintain enough call 
center operators to dispatch police when alarms are tripped.   
 
Verizon does not seem to have much or a cost advantage over other players, since 
they are all using the common carrier phone network.  Verizon might have some 
economies of scale in operating the call center, but this effect would be slight. 
 
Competition – The market is composed of a large number of mom-and-pop alarm 
company operators.  No firm has over 5% market share overall, although there are some 
strong regional players.  
 
Customer Segments – Ask the candidate to speculate on the various customer segments 
and their relative importance, size, and value. 
 
Good Answer:  We can reasonably divide the customer base into urban and suburban 
customers, having different needs and different price sensitivities.  Urban customers 
are likely to have lower incomes but a high willingness to pay due to the increased 
crime rate of the city.  Suburban customers are likely to have a higher income but a 
lower perceived threat due to a lower suburban crime rate.  By first-degree price 
discrimination, it may be reasonable to charge the suburban customers a higher price 
because they are presumably less price sensitive.  We can assume that 50% of 
customers are urban and 50% suburban. 
 
Pricing – Have the candidate come up with a pricing scheme and prices for each of their 
identified customer segments.  There is no right answer, but they must justify why they 
are setting the price they are.  Some areas they might consider: 
 
• Insurance companies generally give breaks on homeowner’s insurance for having 
an alarm.  This will increase the EVA to the customer and can inform pricing. 
• What other services to homeowners pay for monthly? Cable, phone, DSL.  How 
are the values of these services perceived compared to the value of the alarm? 
• Pricing will need to be competitive with other market players. 
• The candidate might assume a net margin based on the competitive landscape and 
use this with assumed market size to determine attractiveness rather than 
determining an end-consumer price. 
 
Regulation – The market is not regulated and government regulation is not expected to 
play a role. 
 
Marketing – Ask the candidate what advantages Verizon might have in marketing vis a 
vis its competitors.  Keep points the candidate should identify include: 
 
• Verizon has monthly customer contact with a large pool of potential alarm 
services customers through its phone bills. 
• Verizon already has brand loyalty for phone service, why not alarm service? 


===== PDF p29 =====
• Shear size of the company (and deep pockets) make it more able to achieve scale 
economies in marketing and reach a broad audience. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
A star candidate will see that his/her time is nearly up and will present a 
recommendation for the client without prompting.  If the interview is within 3 minutes of 
the end, ask: 
 
“So, should Verizon enter into the home security market?” 
 
Good Answer:   Yes.  Verizon possesses several small but important competitive 
advantages for entering into this new market.  It has economies of scale in call center 
operations that will enable it to be highly cost-competitive in operating a security 
network.  It has an established brand that the consumer associates with reliability as 
well as with networking and communications – the primary function of a home 
security system.  More importantly, Verizon already reaches 50M households every 
month through its phone services bill that it could leverage to launch and market this 
new service.  Also, the company has deep pockets and the ability to advertise such a 
service far more effectively than the small, regional competitors.   
 
The size of the opportunity is large enough for Verizon to consider.  Assuming a 
potential market size of $6B in Verizon’s territory, even at only a 10% share, Verizon 
can add $600M in revenue.  Given the low cost structure of this business and the high 
perceived value to the customer, this is likely to be highly profitable revenue as well.  
With Verizon’s marketing clout and customer reach, the company should be able to 
gain significant market share and become the national leader in this space. 
 
