===== PDF p61 =====
Consulting Case Interview Question 
 
Case No.: STRAT3 
Firm:  
Type of Case:  
 
Brain Teaser  (Why are manhole covers round?) 
 
Market Sizing  (How attractive is the market for fire trucks?) 
 
Operations  (Our client’s profits are down. Why?) 
 
Declining Profits  
 
 
Other 
 
Marketing Problems 
 
 
 
X 
Strategy  (Should our client enter the beer brewing industry? If so, how?) 
X 
New Product Introduction  
 
 
Competitive Response 
 
New Market 
 
 
Response to Changing 
Environ. 
 
Merger or Acquisition 
 
X 
Other 
 
Other   
 
 
Initial Facts offered by interviewer:   
 
The Philadelphia Museum of Art (a for-profit institution) has a web site that is basically set up just 
for users to look at.  The head of the museum feels that there must be some way to increase the 
museum’s revenues through use of the web site, and so he asks you to explore this issue as part of 
your summer research project. 
 
The Question(s): 
What do you recommend to the head of the museum? 
 
Suggested Solution 
 
Desired Framework:  [Check all that apply.] 
 
Cost-Revenue and Profitability 
 
 
The 4 P’s of Marketing 
 
The 3 C’s 
 
 
Value Chain Analysis 
 
Porter’s 5 Forces 
 
 
Microeconomic Analysis 
 
Internal-External Factors 
 
X 
Other____________________ 
 
Outline of Your Answer - Important questions asked, additional information divulged, 
assumptions, and logic:  [Walk us through how you arrived at your answer in detail.] 
 
Given that the question asked how to increase revenues (as opposed to profits), I started out saying 
that I would only focus on revenues, and therefore I would not address costs (but suggested that 
someone else do this for their summer project). 
 
I therefore used a framework based on existing forms of generating revenues and new forms 
of generating revenue.  The logic behind this is that there would be two ways to increase 
revenues: 1) use web site to increase sales of existing products and services (i.e., an increase 
in existing sources of revenue) and 2) use web site to market and sell new products and 
services (i.e., a new source of revenue).   
112 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 


===== PDF p62 =====
 
 
I started out by first asking how the museum generates revenue currently: 
Q:  “How does the museum generate revenue currently?” 
A:  “Currently, the museum earns revenues from membership fees, entrance fees, catalog 
sales, and corporate sponsorship of blockbuster shows.  Blockbuster shows are major art 
exhibitions that are sponsored by companies when the collections come to town.  For 
example, a blockbuster show might be called the "US AIR" presentation of Monet’s Garden 
at Giverny.” 
 
I then suggested that the museum do the following to use the web site to increase the revenue generated by these 
existing forms: 
 
-  Offer online catalog ordering via the web site.  Currently, they do these sales of museum 
memorabilia and other gifts through the traditional gift shop at the museum and through 
mail-order catalogues. The web’s easy access would allow customers who have never visited 
the museum to see and maybe order the gifts on-line.  The museum could set it up such that 
a consumer could place an order, supply the credit card number, and the item could be sent 
out right away to whatever address the consumer wanted.  The museum could negotiate a 
deal with Fed Ex to handle the deliveries.  Of course we would have to actively educate the 
consumer as to the security of ordering through the web site, because there may be 
resistance in the market to giving out a credit card number on-line.  The museum could 
guarantee security and back any fraud that might negatively affect our customers.  The client 
could even advertise a little on the web site about what great gifts these souvenirs make.   
The special benefits include: 
- more cost effective, since less overhead costs involved and fewer mistakes during order 
(because consumers enter the information directly) 
- more convenient for customers, because they do not have to be in the store or have a 
catalog handy 
- better service for customers, since gifts are ordered directly with faster turnaround 
 
- Advertise the museum’s regular and special events.  In general, use the web site to advertise 
the museum’s collections and services by providing photos and other information about art 
at the museum.  Utilize this powerful and interactive form of communication!  Provide a 
complete description of what the services include for current members.  Use hotlinks from 
corporate sponsor company web pages (i.e., link from US AIR’s home page), local and 
national tourist web pages (i.e., www.boston.com), and other sources to bring new 
customers to the web pages.  The goal here is to increase membership and entrance fees 
simply by advertising through the web. 
 
- Provide an opportunity for customers to join the museum as members conveniently and 
directly on web. 
This is to boost revenues from membership services through the convenience of the web, as 
opposed to having to be in the museum, or to call during office hours to join. 
 
I then suggested the following new ways for the museum to generate revenue: 
 
                                                                                                                                                        113 
Management Consulting Club  
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
 


===== PDF p63 =====
-Form chat groups about art and other interests of our members.  Members pay an annual fee for 
unlimited access to the museum and special events; we could add special services and features on 
our web site for these dues-paying members as an attempt to increase membership.   
 
-Offer advertising spots on our web site for relevant and appropriate products for art lovers.  
Naturally we would screen advertisers so that we weren’t advertising Bud Light and Marlboros on 
our web site.   
 
 
  
Wrap-up / Recommendations for client: 
As stated above, use the web site to enhance revenues from existing forms, including catalog sales 
and membership/entrance fees.  Also, use the web and its powerful capabilities to offer new 
services, such as chat groups, and online advertising spots for companies. 
 
Desired Answer / Blinding Insights / Twists and Turns (if any): 
The key was to come up with creative solutions for the museum to generate revenue.  There was not 
a lot of material or detail to probe for in the form of questions.  It was important to have some type 
of structure, rather than to list ideas, but it was even more essential to be creative.  
114 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
