===== PDF p48 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
44 
 
Case 13: Street Sweepers 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm:       BCG 
Round:    2006 FT, Final 
Content:  Mainly qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a large industrial conglomerate that has $60-70 million in annual revenues and is 
extremely profitable.  They have engaged BCG to examine one of their business units that is 
underperforming.  The unit manufactures and distributes street sweepers (zamboni/lawnmower-
like machines that a person would ride and which uses two large rotating brushes to sweep up the 
street as it moves by) and has been doing so for 20 years.  While never a standout division, until 
recently it had always been profitable.  4-5 years ago the profit margins started to fall and it is 
currently just above breakeven. 
 
Management of the conglomerate had made a decision 2 years ago that they did not want to 
invest in new features for their product lines and has the approach that they don’t want to invest 
significant amounts of capital now (unless they can be convinced otherwise). 
 
BCG’s task is to analyze the unit’s performance and recommend to the management of the 
conglomerate what should be done.  Tell me some of the areas you’d consider looking into here 
knowing that we only have a few weeks to finish this engagement. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
The interviewer did not allow time for development of a framework – that isn’t the point of the 
case.  Instead, the interviewer simply starts asking questions and they should be answered as 
thoughtfully as possible on short notice.  Being thoughtful but remaining structured is vital here: 
sticking to profits = revenue – costs and drilling down on costs and revenues.  This is a great case 
b/c if you understand basic drivers- it’s completely rational.   
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee:  That’s a tight timeline, so let’s focus on big areas.  So profit is revenues minus 
costs.  Can you tell me about recent trends with regard to costs? 
 
Interviewer:  Sure.  A quick look at the numbers showed costs have been fairly constant over the 
past 20 years, only increasing with inflation. 
 
Interviewee: So I’m thinking I’ll then move into revenue.  How has that stood up? 
 
Interviewer:  Revenue has fallen steadily over the past 5 years.  Why might this be happening? 


===== PDF p49 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
45 
 
 
Interviewee:  It might be happening because of trends in the market, changes in customer 
preferences… 
 
Interviewer:  Since you mention it, who are the customers? 
 
Interviewee:  I suppose they would be municipalities, governments, etc.  I don’t see this as 
being something for individual use. 
 
Interviewer:  Usually not.  That’s right, it’s mostly state and local governments.  So we looked 
into the customers and they are keeping with past trends, replacing their street sweepers every 4-
7 years, and the number of municipalities purchasing street sweepers has remained constant.  
What else might be driving revenues down? 
 
Interviewee: Prices could be coming down… 
 
Interviewer:  Prices have actually remained constant. 
 
Interviewee: So how about competition?  Have new competitors entered the market or stolen 
market share? 
 
Interviewer:  There have been no new competitors.  These are what sales have looked like 20 
years ago to now.  What do you want to know after looking at this? 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
10 yrs ago
5 yrs ago
Today
C
B
Client (A)
 
Interviewee:  It looks like B has taken share from us.  I’d like to know what B is doing 
differently.  And for that matter what C is doing differently so as to be unaffected. 
 


===== PDF p50 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
46 
 
Interviewer:  About 5 years ago, B introduced a new technology that used air vacuums to clean 
streets instead of the mechanical collecting methods that had always been used in the past.  
These air machines are more effective at picking up small debris like sand and small litter, and 
work more quickly and efficiently than the mechanical ones previously offered.  Price points are 
about the same.  B still sells mechanical machines, but the drop in our market share was directly 
related to the new air offering. 
 
Interviewee:  So how about C? 
 
Interviewer:  C makes machines that are far more heavy-duty, it’s really a different type of 
offering. 
 
Interviewee:  So we don’t compete with C in reality? 
 
Interviewer:  No, but we could.  Do you think we’d want to? 
 
Interviewee:  Not likely without knowing much about the market.  They seem to have been 
stable and have an expertise, so unless we can offer something new to their customers I’d guess 
they’ll defend their position in a niche market at all costs. 
 
Interviewer:  Good, that’s the conclusion we quickly came to on C.  Now, what other 
information do you need to recommend something for our client? 
 
Interviewee:  I need to know if we can replicate the air technology. 
 
Interviewer:  We can, but it will take 2 years and cost $25 million. 
 
Interviewee:  Since you said management does not want to make a significant investment, that 
seems unlikely.  So other than that, what trends do we expect from this market going forward? 
 
Interviewer:  What would you think? 
 
Interviewee:  (Pause)  I guess the encouraging news is that we’re still selling despite the new 
technology and the similar price point.  So do municipalities need both? 
 
Interviewer:  Good observation.  In fact they do need both.  So we broke the country into 7 
regions, all of which needed the same amount of street sweepers overall.  In the north, on 
average there was a 22/8 ratio of mechanical to air sweepers needed.  In the south, it was 22/18 
(these numbers do not include C’s models).  For the country, what % of street sweeper sales 
were going to be that are mechanical? 
 
Interviewee:  Roughly 66% (It’s actually 64%). 
 
Interviewer:  Yes.  So why would municipalities need mechanical sweepers if air ones are more 
efficient, and what does this tell you? 


===== PDF p51 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
47 
 
 
Interviewee:  I’d think they’d need mechanical ones to deal with larger, more solid things on 
their streets.  It looks like in the south they can use more air machines which would make sense 
b/c they’d have sand and small debris.  In the north you might get larger rocks, chunks of ice, 
etc.  This tells me the market isn’t going to zero, so maybe the company can simply protect the 
market share that it has, scale back production to the point where the market will be in 
equilibrium between air and mechanical sweepers, and keep decent margins going forward. 
 
Interviewer:  Right, so that’s exactly what we recommended.  Once we recognized these trends, 
we also looked for a strategic buyer, and in fact the conglomerate sold the unit to a foreign 
company that already had air technology developed.  That was outside the scope of this case, 
though – just an interesting follow-up. 
 
 
 
