===== PDF p42 =====
CASE 18:  AERO INCA (McKinsey – Round 1)          
 
Your client is Aero Inca – Latin America’s 2nd largest airline.  The airline has a hub in Mexico 
City and flies to North, South, and Central America as well as a handful of European and Asian 
destinations.  Recently, a number of smaller airlines have expanded and are flying to North 
America directly, taking market share from our client and decreasing revenue and profitability 
(which is heading towards the red).  Your job is to advise on what we need to increase revenue. 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Customers basically come from two areas:  
1) frequent fliers who depart from Mexico City 
2) Through put transfers to smaller cities that go through the Mexico City hub. 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
McKinsey:  How would you think about increasing revenue? 
Me: I would first think about the product mix that we offer in the following manner: (draw 2X2) 
• We can continue selling the same product to the same customer 
• We can sell the same product to new customers (maybe capitalize more on tourists than business 
travelers for example) 
• We can sell a new product to the same market (maybe offer new destinations to business travelers) 
• We can sell a new product to new markets (maybe new destinations to tourists) 
 
McKinsey:  That sounds good.  Aside from the revenue side, what else should you think about? 
Me:  I’d also want to think about costs both fixed and variable that will ultimately affect the 
profitability of these options.  Fixed costs could include planes, the hub, and other equipment (like 
baggage handling machines) that we need to run our business.  Variable costs would include fuel and 
labor. 
 
McKinsey:  What are some of the things that you can do to control costs? 
Me:  With regarding to planes, you can evaluate whether or not it makes sense to buy them or lease 
them.  With regard to the hub, we can consider keeping the hub in Mexico City or moving it to another 
location.  With regards to fuel, you can construct a hedge against future rises in prices (maybe build a 
reserve).  For labor, we could consider unionized vs. non-unionized sources. 
 
McKinsey: Ok.  So, when evaluating some of these options, the VP of network design comes to you 
with a question that he needs the answer to by the end of the week.  He needs to know whether or 
not to increase flights to NY (which we already serve).  This would mean that we would have to 
cancel our two daily flights to Mango, Brazil as we need to use that aircraft to go to NY.  How 
would you decide whether or not to go to NY? 
Me:  At its core this is a profitability question.  I would first want to calculate revenue for the new 
route based on the expected price of the ticket and volume we expect.  Then I’d want to calculate the 
costs that we discussed before in terms of the NY route.  I’d then compare this profit number to what 
we were making on the Brazilian route. 
 
McKinsey: Assume costs are a wash.  How would you figure it out? 
Me: I’d want to know the capacity of the plane used and the expected utilization of both routes as well 
as the price per ticket.  Do we have this information? 
 
 
37


===== PDF p43 =====
 
38
Interviewee’s Solution (cont.): 
 
McKinsey: The plane holds 200 people.  For the Mango run, we get 60% utilization and a ticket 
costs $500.  For the NY trip, we would add 3 additional trips at a ticket price of $500.  Utilization 
is currently 80% on these flights. 
Me:  Ok, I can start doing some calculations.  We would make $120,000 on the Mango route 
(200*2*0.6*500).  As far, as the NY trip, do we expect the same utilization to hold for new flights?   
 
McKinsey: No, we expect utilization across all flights to be 70%. 
Me: Ok, so we need to take into account the lost utilization on the first set of flights.  How many are 
we currently flying? 
 
McKinsey: 12 
Me: Ok so we are currently making $960,000 (12*200*0.8*500).  Before beginning, the new route 
calculation, do we expect any competitive response from our change in routes? 
 
McKinsey: Yes.  We expect the cost of a ticket to drop to $450. 
Me:  So, our total revenue on the revised flight schedule would be $945,000 (15*200*0.7*450).  
That means overall we make $135,000 less on the new structure. 
 
McKinsey:  If that’s the case what could our client do to maximize profitability on its current 
Mango route? 
Me:  The first thing we should focus on is utilization.  If we can get more passengers on each flight 
then we can increase profitability. 
 
McKinsey:  Assume we can’t. 
Me:  Ok, we can also evaluate the cost structure and what we specifically offer passengers.  For 
example, do passengers on these flights need meals or would they pay for them.   We may be able to 
reduce the number of flight attendants.  As mentioned before, we can also look into the options of 
leasing vs. buying the plane and hedging fuel costs. 
 
McKinsey:  Assume we’ve done all we can on the cost side. 
Me:  We may want to evaluate whether or not our profits would be increased if we only flew one 
flight per day.  Even though we wouldn’t get as many customers it still may be more profitable for 
us to only fly one flight. 
 
McKinsey:  Do you really want to leave customers behind? 
Me:  Maybe.  I know that above a certain level additional passengers represent pure profit.  So, if our 
added 40% of utilization on one flight adds more profit than we are getting from only running 60% 
on both flights, we may want to consider it.  This also assumes that there would be no ill will from 
the customers that now can’t fly with the airline. 
 
McKinsey:  Sounds good. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
On the whole this is a good solution. The candidate manages the analysis of the NY alternative 
effectively and clearly defends the recommendation for one Mango flight rather than two in response 
to questioning.  The Candidate sets out a framework for revenue improvement (the 2x2 matrix) and  
for assessing elements of costs. Potential weaknesses are that not all elements are necessarily covered. 
The revenue framework does not mention the potential for increasing price, or driving higher volume 
through lowering price and the cost framework does not necessarily capture all of the elements of the 
cost structure. 
