===== PDF p94 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
90 
 
11. Potato Inc. (Bain R1, CPG/Retail, Profitability, Qualitative) 
Stem: Our client, Potato Inc., is a producer of fried potato crisps, also known as chips. The product is 
high in sodium and fat, comes in several flavors – plain, barbecue, etc. The customers of this product are 
loyal,18 to 30-year-old males that mostly reside in the Southern part of the United States. The year is 
2010. 
 
Our client makes and manufactures chips domestically and has two main product lines: premium and 
price value. They sell their product in convenience stores, gas stations, drug stores, and supermarkets. 
Recently, profits have been decreasing. Potato Inc. would like to understand why this is happening and 
what to do about it. 
 
Phase 1: Industry Landscape 
 
Let the Candidate make his/her structure. It should include a section on the industry landscape. Propose 
starting from there. 
 
Interviewer: What do you think might be happening in the industry? 
 
The candidate should zero in on the fact that the economy in 2010 is still recovering from the recession 
and that customers may be cutting back. Keep pushing the candidate if they don’t point out that the 
problem is from 2010. 
 
Interviewer: Well, we have found that customers are buying the same amount of product as they were 
before. 
 
Candidate: Since revenue is basically price * quantity. If we set quantity constant, then the customers 
may be cutting back on the more expensive chips in favor of the cheaper product. 
 
Interviewer: Good point, but how does that affect the profitability? 
 
The candidate should also identify that the more expensive chips have higher margins and while Potato 
Inc. has been selling the same volume, the profit per sale has been decreasing. 
 
Phase 2: Identifying Profit Enhancing Opportunities 
 
Interviewer: So how can we improve Potato Inc.’s profitability? 
 
There are a variety of good answers to this question. Let the Candidate offer a few. Bonus points to the 
candidate if they structure their thoughts instead of simply rambling off ideas. The candidate should 
identify that one way to increase profitability would be to reduce costs. The candidate should also list 
potential cost areas specific to Potato Inc. Once Interviewer is satisfied that all cost areas have been 
listed, he/she can show the following table to the candidate. 
 
 
 
Case continues on next page. 


===== PDF p95 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
91 
 
 
 
Interviewer: What are some costs you think we can cut? 
 
Candidate: I see a lot of interesting information here. Before I jump in, does the client have any 
objectives I should keep in mind. Specifically, are they trying to achieve a certain level of profitability? 
(This information should assist the candidate in understanding how much cost cutting should be done). 
 
Interviewer: No, they are just looking to be as profitable as possible given the circumstances. 
 
The candidate should now state the observation on the rising labor cost and explore the cost cutting 
areas for consideration based on the Exhibit. The list could include outsourcing production to trim down 
labor cost, automating some processes, and increasing efficiency through training or quality control. 
 
Interviewer: Nice ideas, any risks of us implementing the ideas? 
 
The candidate should now state the potential risks such as expertise retention, increase in logistic cost, 
and the execution lead time and how to mitigate them. 
 
Interviewer: Great conversation, the CEO has just walked in, can you give him a 30-second summary on 
your ideas? 
 
Recommendation 
 
Should walk through what has been discussed, but most basically will conclude: Open more stores, don’t 
raise prices, and control franchisee prices to maximize revenue. 
100% 
 
90% 
 
80% 
 
70% 
 
60% 
 
50% 
 
40% 
 
30% 
 
20% 
 
10% 
 
0% 
Logistics 
Labor 
COGS 
PPE 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
