===== PDF p25 =====
21 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
THE VIDEO STORE 
Category: Profitability; Four C’s 
 
 
Question (posed by interviewer): 
 
Two business school classmates laud their entrepreneurship intentions and mock your interest in 
entering the management consulting industry.  They decide that despite recent trends, what is 
needed is a video rental store closer to the Wharton campus.  They try to convince you to join, 
but in your infinite wisdom you join a prominent strategy consulting firm in Philadelphia.   
 
Well, their first two years meet unprecedented success.  They buy matching Porsches and a 
townhouse in Society Hill.  Needless to say, each time you meet up for social occasions, they 
share with you (mostly with tongue in cheek) their success and a sort of “I told you so” attitude.  
You handle their jabs well, as you feel you have had a terrific experience at your consulting firm.   
 
The story, however, changes in about 12 months.  Despite two and ½ years of dramatic profit 
and revenue growth, profits have dramatically fallen.  They call you (with a fair amount of egg 
on their face) and say “we don’t know what happened and our mortgage and car payments are 
getting tougher to meet.  Can you help us? we know that you help CEO’s of large companies get 
to the bottom of their issues”.  With more than just a little satisfaction and justice in your voice 
you say sure. 
 
What do you think the problem is? 
 
Suggested Questions: 
 
This is an example of a case where the student must probe to get to the heart of the matter.  The 
student needs to ask questions which first diagnose the situation and then (and only then) talk 
about causes of the situation and then (and only then) talk about areas of improvement. 
 
Here are questions that the student should ask to get to the analysis that will help them diagnose 
the problem: 
 
 
Have costs increased? 
 
Have revenues declined? 
 
Have prices been changed? 
 
Have new video stores opened in the area? 
 
Are fewer customers coming to the store? 
 
Are customers renting fewer videos? 
 
Have other entertainment venues opened in the area? 
 
Have there been economic changes in the area? 
 


===== PDF p26 =====
22 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
These key questions will get behind what is happening (competitive changes, pricing 
adjustments, macro factors, people not coming to your store, or people just not renting as many 
videos, etc) 
 
Suggested “Excellent” Response: 
 
This is an example of a case that is founded in 4C’s type issues.  The student has to diagnose 
the problem and find out what is exactly going on and then find out what is causing it.  This is 
how efficient analysis is performed:  
 
If profits have declined then I assume that either revenues have declined or costs have increased, 
what is the case? 
 
Revenues have decreased.  Why would you think that cost is probably not the problem? 
 
Video rental is a high fixed cost business (Rent, Videos and Labor) are all fixed in the context of 
rental revenue.  Thus, the business’ profits will be susceptible to changes in revenues (capacity 
utilization).   
 
Revenues are made up of number of videos we rent in a year and the price we charge.  Has the 
management changed the price of the videos? 
 
No.  What does that tell you? 
 
That means that either fewer customers are coming to the store or each customer on average is 
renting fewer videos.  Which is it? 
 
How would you figure that out? 
 
The security system probably has a counter so that could tell us store traffic, and clearly the 
register receipts could give us number of videos rented per day.  We can look at that data last 
year vs this year and see whether we have a traffic problem or share of wallet problem. 
 
Excellent.  If you found out it was a share of wallet problem, what would you think might be the 
problem? 
 
Share of wallet problems are often driven by internal execution problems (bad selection, poor 
service, etc) whereas, traffic is often external (or market) problems. 
 
Again, excellent.  The data shows that traffic has fallen.  What now? 
 
Here the student should begin to think about hypothesis development.  They have 
diagnosed the problem... i.e. fewer customers are coming into the store. 
 


===== PDF p27 =====
23 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
If traffic has fallen, it is either due to a macro factor or a competitive situation.  My inclination 
is that video rentals are not that impacted by economic factors, so it is probably a competitive 
situation.  Has a new store opened in the area? 
 
No 
 
Has a new movie theatre opened? 
 
No 
 
Mmm...  That is surprising.  I was sure that this was a competitive situation and we have a 
fixed pool of rental community (or movie interested community) and that once a new store 
opened regardless of how good it was, it took share from my client’s store.   
 
Let me ask you something and maybe this will help you along.  What business is your client in? 
 
They are in the video rental business or the entertainment business or leisure business... I see 
there could be other entertainment preference shifts or options, etc. 
 
That is good intuition, but have your full defined your clients business.  What does your client 
do?  What purpose do they serve? 
 
They rent movies for people to watch at home.  They are in the home entertainment business 
and specifically in the home movie entertainment business.  That means that the competitive set 
is anybody who provides movies in the home.  Not just video stores. 
 
Excellent.  What do you think is going on? 
 
Here the student has now diagnosed the problem and can make a very good hypothesis that 
either  Delivery, Cable, PPV or new Movie on Demand technology has infiltrated the 
market or is experience rapid growth.   Thus, the market size for store video rentals has 
been reduced.  
 
Summary Comments 
 
There is no one right way to approach cases.  Structure your case interviews to (1) perform 
structure analysis and fact gathering to properly diagnose the problem.  You could start by 
saying, I would interview customers to find out what they think of the store, however, that is 
probably not efficient, as you don’t know that customers are the problem.  It could be cost, or 
prices, or new stores, or other choices (2) share your logic and hypothesis whenever you can  (3) 
drive to an answer/assessment.   
 
 
