===== PDF p66 =====
19.) Toothpaste Company (Bain, Round 1) 
Stem 
One of our long-ternt clients is a major toothpaste contpany (think Crest or Colgate). Their 
president just called us because they've been given an opportunity to sponsor a NASCAR team, 
and their chairman is very excited about it. The cost to sponsor the team is $20M. However, the 
president is not so sure that this is a good idea. He's called us to ask what some of the things he 
should be considering before making a decision. 
Phase 1: Gathering Information and Structuring the Problem 
Candidate should take a moment to come up with structure. Key elements are fit with current 
marketing strategy and profitability. Others such as amount of exposure/impressions work as 
well, but the first two should be touched upon. 
Candidate should be sure to ask probing questions about the current marketing strategy: 
• 
Customer: Candidate should explore target consumer and come to the realization that 
NASCAR audiences do not have a high overlap with people who make household 
purchasing decisions about toothpaste. 
• 
Channels: Should also explore current marketing channels, e.g., TV, radio, print, other 
sports opportunities, etc. Where does this fit in? 
• 
Budget: How significant is $20M relative to total marketing budget? if not done so 
already, interviewer should reveal that company has $500M revenue, and COGS is 50% 
of revenue. Let candidate identify and estimate other components of the $500M such as 
overhead, selling expenses, etc., but should drive to discover that $100M (or 20%) of 
revenue is spent on advertising. Key insight: $20M is significant portion of budget. 
• 
Exposures - talk about how you would estimate the cost per impression (like a market 
sizing, but just high level approach). TV and live audience size, number of events, # of 
top 3 finishes·, etc. Compare this cost per impression with other marketing channels. 
Phase 2: Option Evaluation & Conclusion 
Interviewer: We see that it is significant from a budget standpoint. How would you determine 
whether a campaign such as this is effective? 
The candidate should realize that this is the core of the case. The candidate should discuss how 
we could determine whether the sponsorship will increase sales. Some ideas include looking- at 
incremental sales, conducting market/consumer research, benchmarking. 
. Interviewer: It turns out that our client has a good relationship with the folks at Gillette, who 
also sponsor a NASCAR team for $20M. They've told us that they have seen incremental sales 
of $1 OOM as a result of their sponsorship. Do you think we could hit the same number? Is their 
approach valid? 
....... Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~;~!~;;.~ Club 
2010-2011 1 st Year Case Book 
112 


===== PDF p67 =====
Ca,ndidate: No, I don't think we could hit same number. Their consumer base is more likely to 
overlap with NASCAR audiences (shaving versus teeth cleaning). Also, I would need to know 
more about their approach to know if it's valid. 
Interviewer: They have NASCAR branded products with total sales of $1 OOM. 
Candidate: Approach is not valid since we are thinking about sponsoring a car to sell more of 
our original product whereas they are selling a new product. 
Interviewer: What might be some of the issues associated with their approach to leveraging 
NASCAR? 
Possible answers: 
• 
Cannibalizing sales of their other products (people buying NASCAR branded shaving 
blades as opposed to Fusion blades) 
• 
Marketing spend required to launch NASCAR branded products 
• 
Alienating potential customers (those who are not NASCAR fans) 
Interviewer: Taking Gillette's results, and making some assumptions about how we would 
compare, how would you determine whether we should pursue this? 
Candidate: I would look at ROI. Initial investment of $20M + some other costs (other 
advertising, legal, etc.). Make sure candidate addresses that there are costs beyond the $20M, 
but don't go in depth. Just call it X. For the return, I would make these assumptions (really 
doesn't matter) to come up with incremental revenue of Y. While incremental revenue is nice, 
what's really important here is the incremental profit, so I would back out COGS, which makes 
our ROI quite small (or possibly negative depending on the numbers and assumptions). It is not 
important to calculate the numbers as much as it is important for the candidate to show that they 
understand the various financial "buckets" and can explain ROI clearly. 
Interviewer: So what would you tell the president of the toothpaste company? 
Candidate: I would recommend not doing the NASCAR sponsorship. Not target consumer, 
ROI is fairly low, and it's a huge part of our total budget. Note: it is good if the candidate 
comes back to the implied reason why the cOlnpany wanted to get involved with NASCAR: to 
target this particular population (largely male, between 25-55, living in suburban and rural 
locations) and perhaps offers other ways to reach this market such as providing free samples at 
NASCAR events, placing ads in magazines targeting this niche, etc. 
-....... Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~;~I~::.~ Club 
2010-2011 1st Year Case Book 
113 
