===== PDF p30 =====
26 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
WHARTON AS A BUSINESS 
Category: Income Statement 
 
 
Question (posed by interviewer): 
 
You are Dean Harker.  A wealthy benefactor has come to you with the news that she will give 
Wharton $100 million.  The grant is contingent, however, upon you using the money 
effectively.  You have 1 week to propose to the benefactor where you would use the money 
before she will finalize the transfer. 
 
How would you, as Dean Harker, propose to use this money? 
 
Suggested Sample  Response: 
 
First, as Dean Harker, I need to think through what does spending the money effectively mean?  
This is a not-for-profit learning institution, but that does not mean that it is not a business.  For 
Dean Harker to be successful, he needs to understand what drives his business and where he can 
achieve the biggest return for his investment.  
 
There are currently four major “business units” that provide a revenue stream for Wharton.  
These include: 
 
WMBA program 
 
WEMBA program 
 
Publishing 
 
Grants and donations 
 
While there are many budding initiatives, including distance learning, these are the four largest 
sources of revenue. 
 
If you rank the relative profitability of these revenue streams, you would likely find that the least 
profitable of the four is the WMBA program.  Publishing is a very profitable business but it 
seems to have high reliance on the education business.   WEMBA is very profitable, as the fees 
charged to the executives are quite large when compared to the length of program.  Grants and 
donations are virtually pure profit. 
 
At first glance one might conclude that Wharton should focus their resources and efforts on the 
highest return areas of securing grants, publishing and expanding the WEMBA program.  It 
would follow then, that the WMBA program would fall as the lowest priority for resource 
allocation.  That would be incorrect, however.  Consider what draws people to the executive 
education program, for example.  The brand cache of Wharton drives the attendance and 
enables the price premium.  Similarly for publishing, the value of the Wharton brand provides 


===== PDF p31 =====
27 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
the credibility behind the content and drives sales.  So what drives the Wharton brand?  
Clearly it is the WOMBA program.   
 
Dean Harker must focus on maintaining the reputation of Wharton as the premier WMBA 
program to attract the best and brightest professors and students.  It is then the academic and 
professional work of these people that contributes to the integrity and value of the brand.  
Obviously the professors publish, hence enabling that revenue stream.  The WMBA students 
graduate and achieve notable success, further driving the brand.  Finally, the alumni are 
responsible, to a large extent, for the grants and donations that Wharton receives.   
 
In the end, the WMBA program effectively ties in every other revenue stream both directly and 
via the resulting brand cache.  Clearly the $100 million is best spent on the WMBA program. 
 
Summary Comments 
 
This is not a particularly difficult case but it does assess the candidate’s ability to think through 
the school as a business and reason through to the underlying driver of that business.  A superb 
candidate will need little to no prompting to think through this case in its entirety. 
 
 
