===== PDF p57 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
MARKET EXPANSION 
 
PAYROLL PROCESSING 
 
 
Question: 
 
A company is very successful in the payroll processing business, allowing employers to out-source their payroll 
function.  The client is considering an expansion into the processing of pension checks for financial institutions.  
Does this product extension make sense for a low-cost producer, and how can they best penetrate this market? 
 
 
Possible Approach: 
 
• 
The crucial question is how the checks are currently being processed (in-house by fund managers and banks 
or out-sourced to other providers) and why? 
 
• 
It turns out that virtually all financial institutions which disburse checks on a regular basis process them in-
house and are relatively cost inefficient in doing so.  This however, does not necessarily present a market 
opportunity on the basis of cost reduction.  The check processing fees are an attractive profit center for all but 
the smallest financial institutions because they can pass the costs (plus a huge margin) on to their clients.  
Since the check processing fees are a relatively small part of the total fund management expense, the margins 
can be very large without customer complaints.  This makes the sub-business of in-house check processing 
very attractive to many of the potential customers of the outsourcing business.   
 
• 
Another factor which makes this product extension unattractive is the importance of accuracy and timelines in 
check disbursement.  The financial institutions would lose a great deal of goodwill if their “out-sourced 
check” processor screwed up, and they had to explain to thousands of upset pensioners that it was another 
company’s fault.  Spending a little more to have it done in-house was considered prudent by many fund 
management institutions. 
 
• 
Note - the check processing business is not always cost driven (i.e., low cost might be critical to small 
employers but quality may be more important to fiduciary service providers) and that a cost center for some 
potential clients (businesses) might be a profit center for others (financial institutions). 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 83 
 
