===== PDF p79 =====
Case: Mighty Mining Company
(inspired by) McKinsey, Round 2
Your client is a global mining company with a location in South Africa.  This particular location is performing below average
financially. McKinsey has been hired to identify the problem and make recommendations to address it.  What would you do first to
approach this problem?                
(Note to interviewer: This leadoff question is meant to focus on actions one would take before diving into the framework 
– actions such as collecting data, visiting the location to observe operations, interviewing employees, etc)
Problem statement narrative
75
This question is intentionally vague, as many Partner level 
cases can be, to encourage the candidate to ask questions at 
this stage.
This is command and control, so start with the first question, 
then provide the detail to the right and ask for a full analysis 
(framework).  After the framework is developed by the 
candidate, dive deeper into cost and operations and ask 
follow-up questions.
Case Type: Operations
Case Style: Command & Control
Overview for interviewer
The processing plant is located 160 miles inland and it uses a 
fleet of large trucks to transport minerals from the plant 
(which is located near the mineral source) to a port city.  The 
minerals are then loaded onto barges and shipped to clients 
around the world.  The plant needs to operate at maximum 
capacity to meet customer demand.
The minerals produced are commodities with low margins.
Information to be provided after actions identified


===== PDF p80 =====
Case: Mighty Mining Company
Potential Issue Tree & Approach to Solving the Case
Key elements of analysis to solve the case
Revenue:  explore historical data, 
trends, product-specific data
Benchmark against competitors and 
other corporate locations.
Revenues
Explore operational issues that might lead 
to poor performance such as interruptions 
in operations (is plant operating at full 
capacity, is it running 100% of the time or 
are there power outages or other
Operations
Costs: explore fixed costs (PP&E, 
overhead) and variable costs (material, 
labor)
Transportation:  considering this 
product is a commodity, transportation
Costs
76
other corporate locations.
are there power outages or other 
disruptions, are there local protests, is 
theft or local unrest impacting plant), 
employee skill level, employee morale, etc
Possible follow-up and guidance to 
interviewer
If the interviewer gives a vague response 
such as “I would want to understand the 
local market conditions” then push for 
specific examples of operational issues 
that would impact a plant in the middle of 
South Africa.
It is important that the candidate identify 
general operating issues and locally 
impacted issues.
Possible follow-up and guidance 
to interviewer
Although important to mention, the 
focus of this case is cost and operations 
so don’t let the candidate spend too 
much time here.
product is a commodity, transportation 
makes up a large portion of the 
product cost and should be separated 
out.
Possible follow-up and guidance 
to interviewer
If the candidate has not already done 
so, ask them to identify the key cost line 
items on the income statement and 
elaborate on the COGS for this 
industry.
COGS: Labor, Materials, 
Shipping/Logistics
Operating Expenses
Administrative, Overhead, D&A


===== PDF p81 =====
Case: Mighty Mining Company
Follow-up Questions
Response should cover a range of ideas as the interviewer is looking for out of the box thinking.  Some ideas might be:  the plant is 
Guidance for interviewer: 
Follow-up question #1
In gathering data from the client, you find that transportation costs are significantly higher as a portion of COGS than any other 
African plant location.  Why might this be?  (If the 160 mile trip from plant to port has not been mentioned, inform interviewer of the 
transportation details here)
77
sending trucks that are not full increasing trips needed, drivers are not going directly to the port (poor route planning, sleeping on 
the job, etc), trucks are hijacked along the route, drivers must pay bribes to get through certain road blocks.
Follow-up question #2
You collect historical data on the average time it takes a truck to make the 200 mile trip from the plant to the port, what should you 
expect the graph to look like?
Interviewer: (The graph should be a normal distribution)  You expected the graph to be normally distributed but your data reveals 
the following graph.  What can you draw from this data?
The candidate should identify that the first peak is expected (per the normal distribution) but the second peak needs to be analyzed.  
Ask for ideas of what might cause the second peak.  These could include certain drivers taking too many breaks, traffic patterns, etc.
Guidance for interviewer: 


===== PDF p82 =====
Case: Mighty Mining Company
Mighty Mining Trip Time Distribution
1000
78
Total round trip time (hours) 
0
# of trips
24


===== PDF p83 =====
Case: Mighty Mining Company
Final Question and Sample Recommendation
Follow-up question
You discover that the port closes at 10pm and any truck that does not arrive by 10pm must wait until the port opens again at 4am to 
drop off its load and return to the plant.  The minimum roundtrip travel time is 7 hours and the plant owns 20 trucks; however, a 
barge needs 30 truckloads to reach capacity and ship out.  What would you recommend Mighty Mining to do about this situation?
Remember: the plant must operate at max capacity to meet customer demand
Rather than crunch numbers around optimization, it is sufficient that the candidate identify that there are 
l b ttl
k i th
l
h i (t
l ti
t h
f
ti
it
f t
k
79
several bottlenecks in the supply chain (travel time, port hours of operations, capacity of trucks versus 
barge) and recommend potential solutions that may be considered:
• In the short term, the company needs to identify the latest a truck can leave and still arrive by 10pm.  
They could use employee incentives to encourage drivers to reduce rest stops along route to make the 
10pm cut-off.  Driver shifts should be rearranged to optimize material delivered to the port. 
• In the long term, see if they lobby that 24 hour port operations is more profitable for all parties.
• Evaluate the costs of setting up a storage facility by the port for night deliveries against purchasing 
more trucks.
• Analyze costs of upgrading fleet to larger size trucks.
• Consider leasing trucks vs. purchasing.  
Sample 
Recommendation
Since location already is poor performing, must analyze cost of capital to ensure that investing in 
capital improvements is highest NPV alternative (ship from other better plants?).
Changes in customer demand could lead to an investment that is not needed long term.
Risks
I would analyze these options and present a final recommendation for the client including justification 
for any investment needed by the company to mitigate the risk of senior management not wanting to 
invest.
Next Step
