===== PDF p89 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
85 
Your client is the third largest toy manufacturer in Europe and has come to you because their 
sales have been stagnant or even declining during the last few years.  Sales had been rising 
before.  Why are sales like this? How can the client improve the situation? Which elements 
would you like to analyze? 
 
[This candidate was applying for a position in Europe.  U.S. applicants won’t be expected to 
know population sizes of European countries, for example.] 
 
(Ed. note: You will notice that in this case the candidate jumped immediately into asking 
questions rather than setting out in detail his method of approaching the case.  Some firms 
recommend, however, that whenever appropriate you should first lay out your framework.  The 
candidate got the job offer, nonetheless). 
 
 
How has the industry growth been during the past few years? 
 
!"The growth has been pretty flat. 
 
What is the client company selling? 
 
!"They are currently the top 3 leaders in traditional toys, aimed at:  
- pre-school children (0 to 6 years); 
- girls toys; 
- boys toys. 
 
So what are the company’s typical products? 
 
!"The highest volume products are: 
  
 
- plastic toys 
 
 
- dolls 
 
 
- vehicles + action figures + games 
 
Does the client manufacture these toys themselves and if so where are the production facilities? 
 
!"The client has its manufacturing done in Asia. 
 
Is the business profitable? 
 
!"The client’s profit margin is about 10-15%. 
 
I could already propose some possibilities the client could look into. The first one that comes to 
mind is that the client is not strong in the electronic game business, which has been the fastest 
growing segment over the last decade in the toy industry. The client should consider one of three 
options: either grow their electronics business themselves, or buy a company that already is 
specialized in electronic games, or else form a partnership with such a firm. 
 


===== PDF p90 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
86 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
We would also need to investigate distribution issues in order to assess why sales are flat. How is 
their distribution strategy? 
 
!"They have subsidiaries in the main European markets, responsible for sales in these markets. 
The sales force visits the distributors of the toys, which are mainly supermarkets and 
department stores on the one hand and toy shops on the other hand. The client has a good 
brand image in its markets. There is no problem in this respect. 
 
Let’s look into the issue of the customers then.  
 
!"[At this point my friendly consultant thought it to be the ideal moment to present me with 
the following (hypothetical) situation:] “Suppose you are in a meeting with this client 
and the question arises as to how large the toy market really is in Belgium? What would 
you say on the spot?” 
 
[Here my case turned into an estimation case.]. 
 
Let’s say that we consider mainly (for this client) the market of 0-14 year old children. There are 
10 million people in Belgium, which translates into about 3 million households if you take an 
average of 3 people per household. Not all households have children, and some have more than 
one, and so I guessed that there would be about 0.5 child on average in this age category per 
household, so 1.5 million children.  
 
Then I looked at the gifts they receive and started to enumerate important occasions children at 
that age get presents from their parents: birthday, Christmas, beginning and end of school, and 
maybe one more occasion, which gives 5 in total. Then I said that each time the parents would 
spend 1,500 Belgian Franc (= 50$) on average. So this means that each child receives toys for an 
amount of about 7,500 BFR per year.  
 
I then multiplied the 7,500 BFR with the 1.5 million children to find my estimate for the toy 
market in Belgium of about 11 billion BFR. This was within 10% of the real figure. 
 
 
