===== PDF p27 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 23 - 
Case 
Case 
Case 
Case 6: : : : Centralize
entralize
entralize
entralized Distribution
istribution
istribution
istribution 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: A.T. Kearney 
Round: 2007 Summer, First 
Content: Qualitative 
 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
I was on the golf course the other day with a friend of mine who owns a chain of 
supermarkets and he posed a question that is still on my mind.  His question was, why 
should he continue to centralize his company’s sourcing rather than split it to 
procurement and distribution at the individual store level? 
 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: This is a pure conceptual case in which you have to come up 
with a number of reasons to go one why or the other.  Be creative in the way you think 
about it, the case is open ended, but look for guidance from the interviewer if you start to 
go too far a field.   
 
Key facts: 
 N/A 
 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: Let me take some time to think about how to go over this problem. 
 
Interviewer: Sure, take your time. […] So, why should he centralize sourcing and 
distribution? 
 
Interviewee: In order to come with an answer I would like to go over the pros and cons 
of centralizing and then weight them in order to come with an answer. 
 
Interviewer: Fine with me. 
 
 
 


===== PDF p28 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 24 - 
 
Interviewee:  
 
 
Pros 
 
Cons 
 
 Ability to “squeeze” suppliers by 
aggregating demand 
 Flexibility to change what to deliver to 
individual stores based on 
daily/weekly demand changes 
 Economies of scale in warehouse size, 
operation, etc. 
 Reduce cost of warehouse by having it 
in a low cost area and not in the store, 
which I assume is a high cost area 
 Local people (at the store level) are not 
trained to negotiate.  Having them at 
the store level is an extra cost 
 Etc. 
 
 
 Local people can understand better the 
necessities (e.g.: because of format, size, 
place) for some (niche) categories 
 If distributed directly to the store the cost 
of distribution is paid by the supplier 
 There may be some products that are not 
bought at the centralized (HQ) level 
because of limited size order.  Managing at 
the store level make it viable 
 Etc. 
 
Interviewer: All good reasons… but I have talked to my friend about many of those 
things and he keeps telling me that there may be something else.  What could it be? 
 
Interviewee: So, we have covered most things and we are still not finding the reason…  
 
Interviewer: Yes. 
 
Interviewee: Looking at the ideas that I put in the pros vs. cons comparison, it could be 
similar to the notion of some products not being bought at the HQ because of some 
quantities asked for an individual store.  What if the supplier refuses to ship to individual 
stores because of limited volume?  He may not have the trucks to do so in such a small 
volume or he may be unwilling to do so because is not profitable to do in that way. 
 
Interviewer: You got to the point.  After a couple of hours in the golf course with my 
friend I came to the same conclusion, which later he validated with his team as the main 
reason. 
 
