===== PDF p42 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 38 - 
Case
Case
Case
Case 10
 10
 10
 10: Jumbo Jet
Jumbo Jet
Jumbo Jet
Jumbo Jet 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Booz Allen Hamilton 
Round:  2007 Summer, First 
Content: Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION  
 
Our client is a large European airplane manufacturer that is developing a new jumbo jet, 
which will be able to hold up approximately 800-900 people.  Parts for the plane are 
manufactured in multiple sites across Europe.  They have provided us the following 
information on site production:  
• Cockpits are produced in Northern Spain 
• The fuselage is produced in Northern Germany 
• Wings are produced in Northern England 
• Landing Gears/Interior are produced in Southern France 
 
The client has asked us to determine where it is most economical to assemble the plane. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Candidate should form a structured approach to investigate the components that make up 
assembly, including costs and capabilities. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: Well, I would like to look into the specific costs incurred from the 
assembly process and also determine the capabilities for assembling the planes across 
different locations (labor skill and supply, etc.). 
 
Interviewer: Ok, I like your approach.  Let’s focus on costs for now. 
 
Interviewee: Great.  I assume that the major costs of assembly would be transportation, 
labor, and PP&E.  Also, I would think that there would be tax incentives to assembling in 
one country versus another. 
 
Interviewer: Good.  Let’s focus on transportation and labor for now, as these are the 
most significant cost drivers.  What are some of the areas that you might analyze for 
potential assembly locations? 
 


===== PDF p43 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 39 - 
Interviewee: I would look at the existing sites where our client manufactures parts, as 
well as other areas in the region that may have low cost propositions, such as Eastern 
European countries that may have cheaper labor costs than Western Europe. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s take France as one location since it is the mid-point of the four 
manufacturing locations and compare it to the Czech Republic where labor is 
significantly less expensive than Western Europe. 
 
Interviewee: Well the location in France would incur less cost because the client would 
already have the landing gears and interior at the facility, and would have to transport the 
other three parts over a shorter distance.  However, the labor costs in France would likely 
be significantly higher than those in the Czech Republic.  Do we have any information 
about transportation and labor costs in each of these areas? 
 
Interviewer: Well, we have determined that labor accounts for about 70% of the total 
costs of assembly and transportation accounts for the other 30%. Disregard the other 
costs such as real estate, etc. 
 
Interviewee: Great.  Well, since labor accounts for 70% of the cost, let’s start there.  Do 
we have any details about how much labor costs in the Czech Republic relative to 
France? 
 
Interviewer: Labor in France is 1.5 times higher than labor in the Czech Republic.  What 
do you think that total transportation costs would be in France relative to the Czech 
Republic?   
 
Interviewee: Since these parts are so large, I would assume that a major part of 
transportation is actually packing and loading the pieces on a truck. 
 
Interviewer: You’re right.  In fact, the marginal cost of each extra mile transported is 
close to zero.  The most significant cost incurred is labor costs associated with the 
loading of parts for transportation.   
 
Interviewee: I would assume that the landing gears and interior are fairly small and 
wouldn’t incur as large expenses for loading/unloading compared to the wings or the 
fuselage.   
 
Interviewer: You’re right.  In fact, the interior and the gears are the easiest to pack of all 
the four parts and the fuselage is the hardest (most expensive).  What would you 
recommend to our client? 
 
Interviewee: Well, I would recommend they assemble the plane in the Czech Republic.  
Since labor accounts for 70% of the total cost, and the labor in Czech Republic is about 
35% less expensive than France, the client would save a significant amount of money, 


===== PDF p44 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
- 40 - 
assuming that the skill level is constant across the two locations.  Additionally, the 
transportation costs would not be lower in France since the majority of transportation 
expense is incurred by loading/unloading the parts and the interior/gears are the easiest to 
pack.  It might be worthwhile to analyze Germany as a potential assembly location 
because the fuselage represents a significant portion of our transportation costs.  The 
transportation savings may balance out the higher cost of labor in Germany (as compared 
to Eastern Europe). 
 
Interviewer: Excellent. One last question – our client knows the demand will be 200 
planes per year and they are trying to determine how large an assembly facility they 
should build.  How would you go about figuring this out? 
 
[Candidate should ask for this data] 
• It takes 9 months to assemble one plane 
• One plane requires a space of about 300 ft x 300 ft 
 
Interviewee: Well, we know that it takes .75 of a year to produce one plane, so we need 
space to produce 150 planes in the facility (200 x .75).  Also, one plane requires 90,000 
sq. ft. of space.  So the total facility would need to be 150 planes x 90,000 sq. ft. per 
plane = 13.5M sq. ft. 
 
 
The interviewee will now be asked to summarize high level findings and make a 
recommendation to the client regarding where it should produce and assemble planes 
and the requirements for this operation. 
 
