===== PDF p45 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
41 
 
Case 11
ase 11
ase 11
ase 11:  Telecom 
:  Telecom 
:  Telecom 
:  Telecom  
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Booz Allen Hamilton 
Round: 2007 Summer, Second 
Content: Qualitative and quantitative  
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a telecommunications infrastructure manufacturer and they have hired us to 
help determine if they have any excess manufacturing capacity.  If there is any excess 
capacity, our client would like Booz Allen Hamilton to suggest a course of action to 
ensure they are profitable and efficient. 
 
The client currently has plants in both Minnesota and Mexico, close to the Texas border.  
The plants manufacture similar products and the facilities are about the same size.  The 
company expanded capacity by replicating their first plant (using it as a template for 
others).   
 
INTERVIEWER BREIFING  
 
Candidate should formulate a logical structure (internal vs. external factors, 
supply/demand, etc.) and then determine if the client has excess capacity or not.  
Interviewer does not offer the necessary data and so the interviewee should ask directed 
questions to extract the following data: 
• Each plant operates an 8am – 5pm shift 
• Demand is flat or declining 
• Client has a relatively high market share of 80% 
• Customers are phone companies and there are high switching costs 
• Our client recently acquired a competitor and there are very few players in the 
market.   
• The client is not highly concerned about new entrants because the industry growth 
is flat or declining, this is not an attractive market. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: I would start by looking into the company’s manufacturing process to 
determine if they are experiencing low utilization rates compared to the overall capacity 
of production.   
 
 


===== PDF p46 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
42 
 
 
Interviewer: The company operates an 8-5 shift and is running at fairly close to 100% 
utilization rate.  However, they have considered shifting to multiple shifts in each plant 
and running a 22-hour workday.  What do you think the overall demand capacity looks 
like in this particular industry? 
 
Interviewee: I would assume that it is either flat or declining because the US telecom 
market is relatively saturated, with little new customer growth. 
 
Interviewer: Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Interviewee: Ok, well, I would now like to investigate the overall market and determine 
where our client sits in the industry.  Do we have any information about their market 
share? 
 
Interviewer: They have a relatively high market share of 80%. 
 
Interviewee: Who are they supplying the products to?  Consumers, business customers, 
or phone companies?  
 
Interviewer: They are a telecom infrastructure manufacturer so their direct clients are 
the phone companies. 
 
Interviewee: Does our client have any reason to believe that the market share could 
change dramatically?  What are the switching costs in this industry?   
 
Interviewer: There are very high switching costs in the industry.  Also, our client recently 
acquired a competitor so they are not anticipating any big declines in market share.  
There are also only a few competitors in the industry with little threat of new entrants due 
to the flat or declining growth. 
 
Interviewee: Given the overall macro trends in this industry as well as their specific 
manufacturing set-up, I believe that our client does have excess capacity? 
 
Interviewer: Why? 
 
Interviewee: Well, the industry is declining and there is less demand for these products 
over time.  Also, opportunities exist to streamline their manufacturing operations with 
more shifts per plant across less overall plants. 
 
Interviewer: Ok.  What should they do?    
 
Interviewee: They could close some existing plants, or they could generate revenues 
from manufacturing products for competitors (or for companies with similar products). 


===== PDF p47 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2007 
43 
 
Interviewer: Looking at the first option, how would you determine which plants to close? 
 
Interviewee: I would look at the overall cost per unit at each plant and determine which 
would result in the most efficient overall location.  Costs could be classified into major 
subsets such as labor, distribution (from Mexico vs. Minnesota).  I would also want to 
know if quality of product differs across any of the plants.  Finally, it would be valuable 
to analyze whether our client could change their plant size and configuration to generate 
further efficiencies. 
 
Interviewer: Good.  Quality is fairly consistent across all of the plants and they are not 
looking into plant reconfiguration at this point.  Labor costs are the most significant 
contribution to cost per unit.  Given that, what do you recommend? 
 
Interviewee: I recommend our client closes the Minnesota plants and increases overall 
utilization of the plants in Mexico by adding shifts.   
 
Interviewer: What are the major risks/concerns of this recommendation? 
 
Interviewee: 
• Negative PR resulting from closing US plants 
• Scalability issues (can the Mexican plants quickly increase capacity?) 
• Quality issues stemming from increased production 
• Reliance on one location/region for all manufacturing 
