===== PDF p38 =====
34 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
LA GUARDIA AIRPORT 
Category: Estimation 
 
 
Question (posed by interviewer): 
 
A client has just started operating vending carts that sell novelty items in high traffic areas, such 
as at airports, train stations and subway stops.  The client is considering installing a cart at La 
Guardia airport.  He wishes to analyze the potential market of this location and has therefore 
hired you to help him find a way to determine how many people fly in and out of the La Guardia 
Airport daily.  
 
This is a good example of a case in which an estimate is required to gauge market size.  
The interviewer here does not wish for the candidate to go through the calculation and 
arrive at a number; instead, the question tests the interviewee’s ability to make form a 
structured approach that can be used to find an answer.  The best way to approach this 
question is to make reasonable assumptions and communicate them to the interviewer as 
you proceed.   
 
Suggested Sample Response: 
 
In order to get to the number of travelers that come through the airport, I’m going to try and 
estimate the number of flights that take off and land daily and multiply that by the number of 
average seats per flight.   
 
That sounds like a reasonable assumption.  What kind of information would you need to do 
that? 
 
To begin with, I would need to know the hours of operation of the airport, and how many of 
those are peak hours versus off peak hours.  Would the client be able to provide me with this 
information? 
 
Unfortunately, the client has no information on airport operations since this is an entirely new 
venture for them.   
 
In that case, I would make an assumption based on my own experience.  Let’s assume that the 
airport operate 16 hours a day, 8 of which are peak traffic hours and 8 of which are off-peak 
hours.   
 
I think that’s a reasonable assumption.  What other assumptions would you need to make? 
 
I would also need to know how often planes take off and land during those two types of hours.  
I’m going to assume, again based on my own experience, that a plane takes off (or lands) every 2 
minutes during peak hours, and every 5 minutes during off-peak hours.  In order to get the total 


===== PDF p39 =====
35 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
number of planes, I would need to multiply by the number of runways.  This would give me a 
total number of planes per day. 
 
That also sounds reasonable, what else would you need to know? 
 
In order to get to the number of travelers, I would need to multiply my number of total planes by 
the number of passengers per plane.  I would assume that every plane, on average, can seat a 
maximum of 200 people.  In addition, I would assume that during peak hours, a plane is 90% 
full, while during off-peak hours, a place is 70% full.   
 
 
 
