===== PDF p76 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
72 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
A grocery chain in New England is considering offering an Internet delivery service (i.e., 
groceries can be ordered via the Internet and delivered directly to your home).  Including the 
client, there are three main grocery chains in the area.  One of them has already entered the 
Internet market.  The only other grocery store currently offering Internet delivery service in the 
U.S. is a Midwest store.  Should the client enter this market?  If so, what issues would they face?  
If not, how should they protect their market share?   
 
I would focus on three main factors: competitor’s strategy, consumer demand, and the cost of 
running this service.  I would decide whether to enter the market based on these findings. 
 
First, let’s look at the regional competitor already in the market.  When did they begin their 
service and how successful have they been to date?   
 
!"They began about 6 months ago and approximately 1% of their sales are from the Internet.  
However, they are forecasting that number to grow.  Of course, we can’t know for sure what 
will happen.  
 
Have your stores experienced any reduction in traffic over these last 6 months?   
 
!"Well, perhaps a very small drop, but it’s hard to say. 
 
Can you tell me about the competitor’s pricing through the Internet; are prices the same or higher 
than those in the retail stores?   
 
!"Actually, prices have been mixed with no noticeable trend.  Honestly, I think they are still 
floundering to see if they can justify a premium. 
 
[I’m getting the hint to move on…]  I see, so it seems that we can’t be sure based upon the 
competitor how successful this project may be, nor can we accurately forecast what the 
competitor’s strategy going forward will be.  Why don’t we move on to consumer demand.  The 
competitor’s sales of 1% via the Internet is small.  This could be because the trend is just starting 
to pick up or consumers are just not interested.  I think I would want to conduct a survey of the 
client’s current customers to assess their level of interest in the service.  This is instrumental to 
determine the market size as well as to assess the threat of cannibalization.  Additionally, I would 
want to survey potential new customers as well.   
 
!"That’s interesting…how would you identify these people 
 
Perhaps we can obtain a listing of residents in proximity to each of our stores and cross reference 
them to credit cards used, “Price Club” membership, checks received, etc.  In this way, we can 
determine who is not shopping at our stores and find out if they would use the Internet service. I 
would also use the survey to determine if consumers are willing to pay a premium for items 
purchased through the Internet to help with the pricing strategy.  Based upon the responses, we 
can determine the potential market size figuring in cannibalization and pricing.  Next, I would 
focus on the costs of running the service. 
 


===== PDF p77 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
73 
!"Good…what kind of costs do you think the client will incur? 
 
Well, there is the cost of the server and maintenance of it, delivery and “order processing” 
personnel, insurance for the delivery people and inventory warehousing costs.  My main concern 
in cost is the inventory.  The client needs to assure not only that the retail shelves are stocked, 
but now also that there is inventory for the delivery service.  The problem becomes, where to 
store the inventory… 
 
!"You’re right, that’s a big concern.  We were thinking that the client could store inventory at 
each retail store, use the current warehouse distribution centers or build a warehouse 
specifically for the Internet service.  What are your thoughts on these options? 
 
I think the answer to that depends on the time frame.  If the client decides to move forward with 
the service, initially I think it would be wise to use the existing warehouse distribution centers, 
provided that they are strategically located so that groceries will reach consumers in a timely 
fashion and that they have additional capacity available.  Building an additional warehouse is 
costly: the building itself, new personnel, training costs, etc.  Unless there is a sustainable and 
sizable demand for the service, I don’t think these costs can be justified.  The client would be 
wise to use what they currently have, wait and see what the longer-term demand for the Internet 
service is (eliminate the “fad” buyers) and then determine if a new warehouse is actually needed.  
I don’t like the idea of using retail stores because inventory storage merely takes away from retail 
selling space.  In addition, retail stores probably don’t have the capacity to store inventory for 
themselves and the Internet delivery service.   
 
!"Hmmm….well, what should the client do? 
  
In sum, the client needs to determine the market potential, cannibalization and the cost of running 
the service.  If there seems to be at least some demand and there is extra capacity in the 
distribution centers, I think the client should at least try the service for a little while.  It won’t be 
too costly for them and this way, if the trend does begin to pick up, the client is ready for it.   
 
If the demand seems low or the client decides to not pursue the opportunity, they do need to be 
careful about protecting their market share.  Perhaps they can do that by emphasizing the 
shopping experience at a retail store.  They can run commercials showing that it is more pleasant 
to roam the aisles in search of your favorite foods, rather than trying to recall what you like by 
staring at a computer screen.  They can also use the surveys to determine if there is anything 
about their current retail stores that can be improved to keep the customer in the store, such as 
music, cleanliness, staff, etc.  In this way, the client can meet the consumers needs in the retail 
store and entice them to stay. 
 
!"Well, that’s a great analysis…we actually did this case and took a very similar approach. 
 
