===== PDF p69 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 65 - 
Case 16:  The Amazing Golf Ball 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Bain 
Round: 2007 Full-Time, Second  
Content: Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
You are an inventor who’s most recent creation is a new type of golf ball. The golf ball is 
indestructible and is not possible to lose. What should the price of the golf ball be? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Key facts:   
 N/A – you are required to generate all assumptions on your own. 
 At some point the interviewer may want to say the following: 
o Don’t worry about the time value of money 
o The golf ball costs $200 to produce with no R&D or fixed costs 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer: How would you approach this question?. 
 
Interviewee:  I think that in thinking about how to price this golf ball we need to 
consider two things, the cost to produce the golf ball and how much the average customer 
would save over his lifetime by using it. 
 
Interviewer: Why are those two items relevant? 
 
Interviewee: Well, we need to price the golf ball above cost (fixed, variable, and R&D 
costs) so that we make money on the ball. But we can’t price the ball above the amount 
that a customer is going to save on other types of golf balls if he uses ours. 
 
Interviewer: OK, I agree with that.  
 
Interviewee: Am I correct to assume that I am to build up assumptions? 
 
Interviewer: That is correct. 
 
Interviewee: OK, lets start with the market size in terms of people. 
 


===== PDF p70 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 66 - 
I’m going to assume that there are 300 million people in the United States. 
 
Interviewer: That’s a reasonable assumption. 
 
Interviewee:  When I was growing up, half of my family played golf. But that’s a bit 
more than average, so let’s say that one-fifth of the US population plays golf. That means 
that 60 million people in the US play golf.  
 
Interviewer: I’m having trouble seeing how that relates to how we price the ball.  
 
Interviewee: You’re right, I wanted to generate a market size just to get a sense of how 
much money we could one day make. Let me get back to the price of the ball. 
 
I’m going to assume each golfer plays golf 2 times a month and uses 3 ball every time he 
plays. That means that each golfer uses 72 balls a year. Let’s just round down to 70. 
 
Let’s also assume that a golfer plays golf his whole life but on average picks it up when 
he is 35. And let’s assume that the average life span is 70 years old. That means the 
average golfer plays for 35 years. If he uses 70 balls a year, he uses 2,450 balls over the 
course of his life. Let’s just round that to 2,500. 
 
Now we need to come up with how much an average golf ball costs. I want to say that a 
pack of 3 costs $5. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s just call it $2 a ball. 
 
Interviewee: OK, at $2 a ball that means the average golfer spends $5,000 over the 
course of his life. But we have to discount that to account for the time value of money. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s not worry about that for the moment. 
 
Interviewee: Great. So $5,000 would be the most you could charge. The least you could 
charge would be the cost of the ball. How much does it cost to produce the ball? 
 
Interviewer: $200 a ball. 
 
Interviewee: OK. Are there any fixed costs? Also, how much have we invested in the 
ball to develop that? 
 
Interviewer: I think those are excellent points, but let’s not worry about that right now. 
 
Interviewee: OK, then I would say we should price the ball between $200 and $5,000. 
 
Interviewer: I want you to tell me exactly where we should price the ball. 


===== PDF p71 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 67 - 
 
Interviewee: Well, if the customer is perfectly rational, then anyone less than 35 is 
willing to pay up to $5,000. But there will be some golfers older than 35, which means 
they will have fewer years of play and be willing to pay less. Plus, $5,000 is an awful lot 
for a ball and some people don’t know for sure that they will play golf for their whole 
life. We’d have to do some market research to come up with the correct price, but I think 
somewhere around $2,000 would be appropriate. 
 
Interviewer: That seems like a lot. 
 
Interviewee: It is a lot, but the price of the ball is well below how much the average 
golfer would spend on balls. 
 
Interviewer: What would you do for older golfers? 
 
Interviewee: I think that maybe you could offer the ball at a discount, something like 
movie discounts for seniors, etc. 
 
Interviewer: But what about a 15-year-old who doesn’t have enough money to buy a 
ball? 
 
Interviewee: Well, I suppose you could discount it for him, too. 
 
Interviewer: But by how much? You’re selling a cheap ball to a kid who’s going to play 
for more than 50 years! 
 
Interviewee: You’re right. Well, what if you arrange for financing for the ball. 
 
Interviewer: This is intriguing, tell me more. 
 
Interviewee: Well, it’s a bit like a student loan, where you would arrange financing so 
that the 15-year-old only has to pay a small amount up front and then pays for the rest 
over time, with principle and interest payments. 
 
Interviewer: I like that idea. What’s the problem in terms of the market for this ball? 
 
Interviewee: Well, the funny thing about this ball is, let’s suppose you sell one to every 
golfer in the world. Because the ball never wears out, you have no new market except for 
the population growth rate. And that’s only for incremental growth, because when 
someone dies they can pass it on to someone else. 
 
Interviewer: You’re right. And when we told this to the potential investors, they didn’t 
like that at all. They didn’t like that they’d put in money now for a business that won’t 
have a market after a year or so. What would you say to them? 


===== PDF p72 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 68 - 
 
Interviewee: I’d say, look, you have the opportunity to invest in a company that is going 
to sell $2,000 golf balls to 60 million people overnight, and the balls only cost $200 to 
make. That’s a huge revenue generation opportunity. You could get your return out after 
a year and go invest in something else. 
 
Interviewer: Totally correct. They’d be crazy to pass that opportunity up. Nice job. 
