===== PDF p17 =====
13 
Timber Crisis 
Our client is a Canadian-based Timber Company in 2009.  It primarily makes 2x4s, and the U.S. Residential 
construction market is, by far, the largest consumer of these products.  It also sells sawdust, which is a 
derivative of 2x4 production.  The housing crash has just happened, and demand has dropped precipitously.  
The client is in dire financial straights and bleeding cash.  What can we do to turn it around?   
Problem Statement Narrative 
Company:  
Bain, Round 1 
Difficulty:  
Hard 
Industry:  
Manufacturing 
Case Type:  
Turnaround 
• Creativity 
• Endurance 
• Market Fundamentals 
 
Concepts Tested 
Case: Timber Crisis 
This case is a general brainstorming exercise and gives the appearance that there is some operational change that can 
happen.  The reality is that nothing can be done– the company is the lowest cost player in a commodity industry and is 
already operating as efficiently as possible.  There are no other revenue streams.   
 
For the interviewer, most of  this case will be giving periodic bits of information and then shooting down ideas – 
a classic pressure test interview with little data and a very intractable, unstructured problem.  Have the candidate 
come up with a framework, and pressure test them on it. There is no math involved. 
 
 
Case Notes 


===== PDF p18 =====
14 
Timber Crisis 
Exhibit #1 
Bits of  info that can be given as time goes on (not necessarily in this order): 
 
1) Privately owned, family has cash to spend if it makes sense. 
 
2) 2 step production process– trees cut down, sent to saw mill, sent on trucks to transportation warehouse. 
 
3) All our equipment is brand new, our employees are optimized, running at full capacity, trucks are new and 
fuel efficient (we bought them during boom times). Interviewee should take away that we are the leanest, 
most-efficient operation in the business. 
 
4) We have 1/3 Market share, rest of industry is small, fragmented and much higher on the cost curve. 
 
5) We lease land for trees from Canadian government, cost of that lease is negligible– we pay government 
for each tree cut down. 
 
6) Our 2x4s are sent by truck to the closest warehouse in Chicago, and then whoever needs them buys from 
there.  Commodity market all products the same. 
 
7) Candidate should try to look at various other potential revenue streams– we can’t utilize them because 
our firm isn’t set up to and doing so would be prohibitively expensive (shoot these down individually). 
 
 
 


===== PDF p19 =====
15 
Timber Crisis 
Answer 
1) Liquidation – (not the best option given how we are lowest cost/huge market share), but 
not an unreasonable idea. 
 
2) Wait it out – smaller, higher cost competitors will fail and adjust supply/demand balance to 
push up prices and help us.  Plus, housing tracks GDP growth and that is bound to pickup 
at some point (can cite 2009 stimulus package, etc). 
 
3) Since family has cash, buy up smaller competitors to bring capacity offline sooner.  
Candidate should mention that there may be anti-trust risk in this. 
 
NOTE: Throughout the process, the interviewee might get frustrated at the lack of 
information, the lack of data, and the high level of pushback you give them – this is the whole 
point. The purpose of this case is to test the candidate’s ability to stay calm and work in highly 
ambiguous situations. 
 
End the case interview once the candidate has discussed these issues for 20-30 minutes, and 
force them to come up with a conclusion framework something like the one above. 
Solution 
