===== PDF p30 =====
Case 4: ABC Conglomerate 
Bain, 1st Round 
 
About This Case 
 
This was a first-round Bain case.  It is fairly straightforward in the analysis, but the 
difficulty lies in keeping the information straight between the three divisions.  Give out 
the information freely, but make the candidate ask for each piece of information for each 
company.  In order to crack this case, they will need to have neat and orderly notes and 
be able to quickly form a mental picture of each of these different divisions.   
 
Note that this case is also difficult because there is no information about the products or 
industries.  This is not important to the case, so don’t make anything up – just tell the 
candidate that they should focus on the information they have. 
 
The Problem 
 
The CEO of a major conglomerate is dealing with poor profitability in each of his three 
divisions: A, B, and C.  What should he do to maximize value for his shareholders? 
 
Information Gathering 
 
Read this information well before you give the case.  The same information is available 
for each of the divisions, but make the candidate ask for each division’s information 
separately rather than summarizing the data for them.  Do not offer any information 
without being asked specifically and concisely for it. 
 
Division A 
 
Competition – The firm is the clear market leader with 60% share. 
 
Cost Structure – Manufacturing is done in Asia by all firms and is largely considered to 
be as low-cost as possible. 
 
Revenues – This division generates over 60% of the firm’s revenues but gross margins 
have been declining in recent years.  The high fixed costs maintained by this division 
have moved net income into the red as gross margins have declined.   
 
Pricing – Prices have been becoming increasingly competitive.  Division A has had to 
price aggressively to maintain sales volume, even with its strong market leadership 
position. 
 
Market Trends – The overall market for division A’s product has been shrinking in the 
last few years and looks like it may continue to do so. 
 


===== PDF p31 =====
Customer Preferences – Customers are moving to an entirely new product category as a 
substitute, and prefer the product category of Division A less and less. 
 
Threat of Substitutes – A new product category is filling the customer need previously 
served by Division A’s product.  Division A is not well positioned to enter this new 
category. 
 
Division B 
 
Competition – The firm has only 5% and is one of many players in the market. 
 
Cost Structure – This market is relatively new and it is believed that costs can be 
reduced significantly from their current position.  
 
Revenues – Revenues have been low but growing.  The division is running a negative net 
cash flow as it is currently investing in marketing, R&D, and plant capacity.   
 
Pricing – A wide range of prices exist in the market currently with margins generally 
high. 
 
Market Trends – The overall market is growing at 10% a year and is expected to 
experience significant growth in the near future. 
 
Customer Preferences – This is a relatively new product category and consumers are 
not yet sure what they want or like.   
 
Division C 
 
Competition – The firm has 50% share with only one other major competitor and a few 
minor ones. 
 
 
Cost Structure – The firm has significant economies of scale and has the lowest variable 
cost in the market.  Significant expenditures are being made in marketing, R&D, and 
plant capacity in an attempt to grow revenues.   
 
Revenues – Revenues have been strong with good operating margins, but have been flat 
for the past few years. 
 
Pricing – Division C has a price leadership position in the market.   
 
Market Trends – The overall market is not growing and expected to remain flat for the 
foreseeable future. 
 
Conclusion 
 


===== PDF p32 =====
A star candidate will see that his/her time is nearly up and will present a 
recommendation for the client without prompting.  If the interview is within 3 minutes of 
the end, ask: 
 
“The CEO just called and wants to know what he should do.” 
 
Good Answer:   Clearly the conglomerate needs to rationalize its company portfolio 
to maximize shareholder return.  Each of the three divisions is in a different stage of 
the market lifecycle and needs to be treated accordingly. 
 
Division A finds itself in a declining industry with no apparent way to move into a 
new product category.  As the incumbent firms struggle to maintain volume in a 
shrinking market, prices have fallen along with volume.  Operating income is no 
longer enough to cover a high fixed cost base and the company is bleeding with little 
chance to recover.  Division A should be divested immediately. 
 
Division B is in an emerging growth market.  While it is not making money today, it 
is in a favorable industry and represents a strong investment opportunity.  The 
division should invest aggressively in R&D, marketing, and production capacity in an 
attempt to become the market leader by developing differentiated, branded products. 
 
Division C is the leader in a mature industry and has the ability to generate a steady 
stream of cash for use in other investments – namely Division B.  Division C should 
streamline operations by eliminating all expenditures not directly needed to maintain 
profitability and should be managed as a cash cow. 
 
