===== PDF p70 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
66
Venture Golfing in the Caribbean 
 
Opening 
Your consulting firm has just signed a new client, Venture Golfing, a real 
estate company that specializes in buying premium tracts of land and 
transforming them into top-rated golf courses. To date they have only 
bought properties within the United States and Canada but are now looking 
to expand into other territories. In particular, they have been offered a large 
section of beachfront property on an independently governed Caribbean 
island. They are very interested in pursuing this opportunity but want your 
advice first. Should they proceed or pass? 
 
Background 
Provide the following information if requested: 
 
General 
• The property belongs to a world-renowned athlete who is looking to 
sell after 25 years of ownership. It consists of 15 acres of mostly 
beachfront property. 
• The island only has one other golf course, which is in high demand but 
not rated very highly. 
• The seller has agreed to allow Venture Golfing to option the property 
for six months After this time period, Venture Golf would either have 
to buy the property or relinquish their rights to it. 
 
Construction Costs 
• The island is non-union and labor costs are subsequently less than 
those in the United States 
• As the island has several large resorts, there is a ready supply of water 
and food.  
• Electricity is readily accessible and inexpensive. 
 
Government Obstacle 
• Non-citizens are not permitted to own property. Foreign entities must 
work through a title-holder who lives on the island. There are a 
number of companies that exist for this purpose; however, it would 
take some time to find a reliable agent with whom to work. 
• The property is not zoned for a golf course, but instead is zoned as a 
residential area 
• Government bureaucracy is notoriously slow. Even without challenge, 
something as rudimentary as petitioning for a zoning change could 
easily take over a year to resolve. 
 


===== PDF p71 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
67
Environmental Laws 
• Five hundred year old ruins have been found on a neighboring lot. If 
any were uncovered on this property during construction, all work 
would need to stop. However, ruins are uncommon and chances of 
uncovering any are slight. 
 
Social Costs 
• The property neighbors on four large residential lots, all owned by 
wealthy retirees. 
• From a preliminary investigation, the neighbors do not seem to 
welcome the idea of construction next door to them. 
• The only road that connects the property to the island’s main highway 
runs through two neighboring properties; building a new road would 
require going through one of the neighboring properties as well. 
 
Answer 
Moving forward with this acquisition is not recommended. Buying an option 
would only allow Venture Golf to delay its purchase decision for six months. 
Changing the zoning requirements could take well over a year to arbitrate 
and the decision may end up not being in Venture Golf’s favor.  
 
Moreover, limited highway access, unfriendly neighbors and the potential of 
unearthing an archaeological find all stand as cogent reasons not to pursue 
the decision.  
