===== PDF p102 =====
16. French Cars (OC&C) 
Our client is Renault, one of the biggest French automobile companies. They are looking into 
launching a car in the US. This would be the company's first US venture. It is a compact car that 
will cost $15,000. It has already been out in France and has sold well. The client would like us to 
do a market sizing and decide whether or not to enter the US market with this car. 
Phase 1: Market Sizing 
Behind the scenes: Let the interviewee go through the stmcture, but then get right into the 
market sizing. This is the main section of the case and should require a lot of brainstorming 
before getting on the right track. 
Interviewer: How many people do you think would be interested 'in this car? What questions 
would you ask in order to figure this out? 
Interviewee: The best way would first be to look at the US population. How many households 
are there? How many households have cars? Where do they live? 
Behind the scenes: Don't move on until the interviewee has thought about where people live, 
specifically the breakdown of urban, suburban, and mral dwellers as the three breakdown that 
determine how one might use a car. 
Interviewer: Good: What percentage of the total number of households do you think fall into 
each of the t!n·ee categories? Why do you estimate these numbers? How many cars do you think 
each family owns? 
Possible answers: This table is based on an estimate of lOOM households in the country. These 
numbers are fluid and depend on the assumptions the interviewee has made. However, the goal is 
to get to the total number of cars for each of the three types of places to live. 
Type of Area 
% of Households # of Households 
# Cars/Household Total# of Cars 
Urban 
30% 
30M 
1 
30M 
Suburban 
50% 
50M 
2 
lOOM 
Rural 
20% 
20M 
2 
40M 
Interviewer: Ole, now how many of these cars do you think are compacts? Why do you think so? 
Who in each segment would use a compact car and why? 
Possible answers: (this is just an example; other answers are good as long as they are backed up 
by logic) Maybe 50% of the urban market is compact cars, because of parking constraints, young 
people who can't afford more expensive cars, etc. 20% of the suburban market has compact cars, 
2008-2009 Case Book 
97 
.. ;;_, 
.;t) 
1 I 
I I 
J 
.J 
"1 
·i 'I 
' 
.i 
I , 
l 
.I 
i , 


===== PDF p103 =====
I" 
I 
' 
mostly as a second car for the teenager, but the main vehicle is usually bigger. People in the 
country usually have big tmcks or Jeeps 
Interviewer: These sound like good assumptions. So, what do you think the total annual market 
for compact cars is? 
Interviewee: Take the percentages given just now and multiple them by the total number of cars 
in each category. Sum these three. Then remember that people don't but cars every year. Make 
an assumption about how often people by cars (for example, every 10 years). Divide the total 
number by 10. 
Key Insight: The interviewee should now calculate annual sales without being prompted. 
Multiply the annual market by $15K. No matter what the assumptions, this should be a pretty 
sizable dollar amount, making the market look attractive. Even if Renault can capture a small 
part of it, this would be profitable. 
Phase 2: Marketing 
Inten•iewer: Well, that looks promising. What other considerations do you think we should take 
into account when lannching this product? How would you market it? 
Behind the scenes: The marketing strategy should praise the benefits of owning a compact car. 
Inten•iewer: Are there any challenges you see in launching this product in the US? 
Possible answers: ah·eady a glut of compact cars in the market, desire for SUV's if oil prices 
ever go down, lack of sales force here since this is a French company, Americans liking dome,stic 
cars, shipping and taxes possibly bringing down profits 
Recommendation 
Interviewer: The CEO is coming to hear your recommendation. What will you tell him? 
Possible Answer: This is a potentially very profitable market. Even if we capture a small pmi, 
there will be a profit. There are a few marketing concerns, such as building a sales force n the 
us. 
2008-2009 Case Book 
98 
,. 
;: r 
f 
;. 
