===== PDF p101 =====
Table of Contents 
 
97
Practice Case 42: American Airlines  
(Mckinsey - Round 2) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:   
 
You are the CEO of American Airlines.  You are just informed that the 
price of oil has dropped to nearly $0.  Basically, consider the idea 
that you can acquire oil as easily as you could water. (Assume that 
there are no significant costs in transporting the oil, acquiring it, 
etc.) 
 
Who are the first three people you would call within your 
organization as the CEO? Explain your motivations for contacting 
each of these people and what you hope to accomplish just having 
received this information about the price of oil.  
 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:   
 
Would competitor airlines have access to the same low cost fuel? Yes 
 
 
 
III Sample solution 
 
There are many solutions to this case, a good solution will have a solid 
upfront framework (touching on most of the major issues) and show some 
creative thinking. 
 
Sample answer: 
 
The 3 individuals I would contact: 
 
CFO ñ The goal would be to understand how our oil/fuel costs play into larger 
cost structure per flight.  If oil were a significant portion of costs per flight, 
would there be an opportunity for us to lower costs and allow us to offer 
more competitive pricing on certain routes.  Also, I know we have been 
taking losses on flights, so would lower costs allow us to increase capacity in 
order to increase revenues?  Is there some difference in fuel costs between 
direct flights and indirect flights (1-stop or 2-stop)? Perhaps we can now 
afford to fly more direct flights between long distances because of lower fuel 
costs and gain an edge against competitors.  
  
Marketing Department ñ To better understand the current level of consumer 
demand for the industry and to see if there are any opportunities to add 
additional flights on existing routes or new routes in order to raise revenues.  


===== PDF p102 =====
Table of Contents 
 
98
I would want to better understand the perceived value of direct and indirect 
flights and if there is opportunity for us provide lower priced direct flights out 
of Chicago since that is our hub.     
 
Scheduler/Operations Department ñ To understand where exactly, in terms 
of our current flights and destinations, we could add flights and what cities 
we could better serve.  Any operational aspects of our system that is 
inhibited by fueling costs.  
 
 
Interviewer: Okay, letís focus on your first conversation with the CFO.  You 
mentioned that you would consider lowering your prices with your lower fuel 
costs.  However, your competitors can then lower their prices as well and you 
could potentially get into a price war, further depleting your revenues. Are 
you sure about this? What else might you consider? 
 
Answer:      
Thatís a good point, since competitors would have access to same low cost 
fuel and assuming they have a similar cost structure.  One possibility would 
be to differentiate our service.  For example, some competitor airlines out of 
Chicago likely have lower airfares than us for certain destinations, but they 
have 1 to 2 stops in between.  AA, on other hand, offers all direct flights out 
of Chicago (because the city is our hub) for a slight premium.  Perhaps, we 
can now lower our prices to compete with indirect flights prices but with the 
added value of a direct flight.  It serves to our advantage that Chicago is our 
hub and one of the busiest airports in the country because this will give us 
huge volumes of direct flights. 
 
Another possibility would be to consider the Southwest model for AA.  Now 
that oil is cheap, does it become economical for us to operate flights very 
short distances such as a Chicago to Detroit and offer a more convenient 
option to driving, other modes of transportation.  
 
 
