===== PDF p10 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
6
Competitive Strategy in Auto Insurance 
 
Opening 
Our client is an auto insurance company. It has just learned that a 
competitor has announced the initial roll-out of a new program in Texas that 
it calls an “as you use it” policy. A GPS device is installed in each insured’s 
car as part of the program, and reports the location of the vehicle on a 
minute-by-minute basis.  
 
Our client wants to know whether it should respond. 
 
Background 
Provide the following information if requested: 
 
• The client company is unremarkable in the industry, on par with the 
top five players.  
• No particular competitive advantage exists. The industry is rather 
commoditized. 
• There is heavy price competition within the industry, and the industry 
is highly regulated. 
 
Answer 
The interviewee may focus on the following issues raised by this fact 
situation: 
- 
Customers 
o What customers would this policy attract? What customers might it 
drive away? 
o Are there privacy issues? Legal issues? 
o Why Texas? 
- 
Company 
o How much to install a GPS in every vehicle?  
o Who pays for it – the client or the customer?  
o What will the cost be for monitoring every GPS?  
o What processes need to be set up to deal with this product – 
monitoring, reporting, liaison with police for stolen vehicles? 
o What would the policy implications be when certain information was 
discovered – e.g. customers speeding, erratic driving  
- 
Competitor 
o Is this competitor a national player?   
o What is its coverage/market share?   
o Are its prices / cost structure competitive?   
o Are the competitor’s customers similar or different than our client’s?  
o Are other competitors considering this? 


===== PDF p11 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
7
 
Conclusion 
The point of this case is to identify the impact this program could have on 
the car insurance industry. The key aspect of course is the fact that cars 
using this insurance policy will be tracked at all times.  
The interviewee should discuss issues of privacy and invasion as a 
consequence, but benefits afforded to those insured on this policy: someone 
who doesn’t drive much, the elderly, or someone with a very short 
commute, may benefit from lower costs under this program. 
Rental car companies can use this program to track the whereabouts 
of its vehicles. Some companies do this already, with the “black box” data 
recorders. The GPS system would be more involved. Rental companies 
should consider how this would affect its customers – would they want the 
rental company to know their every move?  This brings us back to “Why 
Texas?”  Rental companies likely have stipulations on cars rented in Texas 
that they are not driven over the border into Mexico. With GPS tracking, this 
practice could easily be monitored. There are legal / official benefits to this 
program, including potential aid to police / FBI / DEA institutions seeking to 
reduce illegal drug / immigrant trafficking across the US / Mexico border. 
Additionally, the GPS system can be used to assess driving habits of 
the insured, and perhaps more accurately describe the “risk rating” of the 
driver. Insurance companies base policies and premiums heavily on risk 
ratings. A good driver, under this program, could likely be offered an 
extremely competitively priced premium – a concern for the client company. 
Additionally, if the pricing is solely based on usage, a poorer driver, who 
drives infrequently, but has been quoted high prices by other insurers, may 
be offered a lower rate by this new program. 
The successful interviewee will engage in a conversation that 
addresses the risks and issues raised by the introduction of the new 
technology. The Texas location is important; they should recognize the 
proximity of a foreign country and the potential for the crossing of 
international boundaries. Privacy is another concern: what customers will be 
comfortable utilizing this program?  Will the company introducing this be 
able to greatly undercut the client’s premiums by appealing to certain low-
usage drivers, and steal a great deal of market share? 
There is no right answer; a thoughtful discussion that addresses these 
issues in a logical manner is a successful interview. 
