===== PDF p44 =====
CASE 19:  PHARMACEUTICALS II (ZS Associates – Final)          
 
Our client is a pharmaceutical company with two divisions.  Each division has a separate sales 
force.  Division I manufactures a diagnostic test (like a blood sugar test) and Division II 
manufactures a pill or drug or treatment (say, Claritin).  Does it make sense for the divisions to 
combine the sales forces into a single sales force? 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Division I requires a sales force of 75 people.  Division II requires a sales force of 50 people.   
• Each sales person is equally effective at selling.  Each sales person makes a certain standard 
frequency of hospital visits each month to hospitals in their respective regions.   
• The doctors and health professionals targeted by the sales forces currently in place are in totally 
separate parts of the hospitals and do not come into contact with one another. 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
• I structured the discussion around benefits and costs.  Benefits I mentioned were mostly synergies, 
cost savings from being able to get rid of certain sales people, or higher sales as a result of more 
freedom per sales person and therefore a chance to spend longer on each visit.  Costs were extra 
training, one-time severance pay, etc. 
• It was important to realize that the education and training of each sales force member was key to 
their ability to add value and generate sales.  Doctors saw sales people as true experts and trusted 
advisors.  It was very difficult to actually discuss numbers in this case, because so many of the 
obvious differences were apparently “assumed to be the same.” 
 
 
 
39
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
In assessing whether or not to combine the sales forces we need to determine whether or not doing so 
would increase profitability of the firm. This means that we need to look at both the cost and revenue 
impact of the decision. 
 
Looking first at revenue, we would need to determine whether combining the sales force will result in 
generating higher sales. To assess this, I would want to know whether the two sales forces are 
currently serving the same customers. i.e. are they visiting the same doctors at the same hospitals? If 
so then there is the potential for the combined sales force to do a greater number of visits and thereby 
sell a greater number of products by selling both products as part of the one visit. If however the client 
of the two sales forces is very different, as the case facts suggest, then the potential for increased 
revenue is diminished. Although travel time may be reduced, the staff member is still making two 
visits to two different doctors in the hospital to sell the two products. In fact, revenue may fall if 
combining the sales forces reduces the sales reps expertise in a particular drug meaning that they are 
no longer perceived as a reliable and trusted expert. There would also be the loss of the benefits of a 
strong relationship if some sales reps are made redundant and the remaining reps have to develop 
relationships with a new set of doctors. 
 
Next I would want to look at cost implications. This would include the one time implementation costs 
of the decision, including retraining, severance, re-organization etc. There may however be ongoing 
synergies leading to cost savings from servicing the same number of doctors with a smaller sales force.   
