===== PDF p54 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
50 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
A client’s company operates 1 passenger and 2 cargo ships in the Baltic sea, between Finland 
and Germany. The ships are old and need to be replaced. The choices before him are to continue 
with the same configuration, 1 passenger and 2 cargo ships, or to go in for 2 hybrid ships, which 
can handle both cargo and passengers. 
 
 
First, I enquired about the current operating environment. Then I examined the costs and benefits 
of each option and also checked for potential showstoppers for operating the new hybrid ships. 
 
!"The current market for shipping: 
o The market’s lucrative. There’s not much competition. 
o Passengers – Profits $1000 per person per round trip on average. Use the ships 
for recreation; people stay inside since it is in the Baltic after all. The cruise 
leaves every other evening at 6 PM and arrives at the other port at 6 AM, and 
heads back to the homeport at 6PM, again getting back at 6 AM. 
o Cargo – Profits $2000 per trailer unit for a round trip on average. The cargo 
ships leave daily, one from each port, at 6AM and reach at 6PM. 
 
How would the hybrid ships operate? 
 
!"The hybrid ships would leave daily, one from each port, at 6 PM and reach at 6AM. 
 
At this point I asked about showstoppers: change in cargo loading time, passenger experience 
due to the presence of cargo, etc. 
 
!"There would be no problems in changing the cargo loading time from 6 AM to 6 PM for 
the hybrid configuration. The cargo would be in the hold, and won’t harm the 
passengers’ experience, which is mostly indoors anyway, since the Baltic is a cold, cold 
place and no one wants to stay outdoors. 
 
Capacities? 
 
!"The passenger ship has a capacity of 1000 people, though occupancy is 600.  The cargo 
ship has a capacity of 120 trailer units, with utilization of 100.  
 
Growth potential? 
 
!"The market’s mature. 
 
Costs for buying /building, and operating the ships? 
 
!"The operating costs are the same. The hybrid ships cost $250 million each to build, the 
passenger ship costs $200 million, and the cargo ship costs $100 million each. 
 
I asked for a few minutes to check the numbers. 
 


===== PDF p55 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
51 
!"You need some more information (heart sinking). The capacities for the new ship are as 
follows: 
o 800 passengers, with occupancy of 500, and 100 trailer units, with utilization of 
90 units. 
 
At this point I ran the numbers. I considered the profits in each case over a 2-day period.  
In the old situation, there would be one round trip for passengers and 2 round trips for cargo, 
giving total profits of $1 million. In the new situation, there would be 2 round trips for 
passengers and 2 round trips for cargo, for a total profit of $1.36 million. 
Thus, in the new situation results in ~$65 million extra profits annually. Given that the extra cost 
for the new configuration is $100 million, the client can easily recover his extra investment and 
increase the ROI. 
 
!"Good. That’s what we told our client and he made lots of money! 
 
Other points covered: In the new situation the passenger cruise operation is more dependent on 
traffic from both ports. In the old situation it could depend on traffic from just one port. So if the 
economy in one country goes down, then the new operation is less profitable. However, given 
that the ships operate between Germany and Finland, and not with the ex-USSR states, the 
chances of an economy imploding are small. 
 
Given that the actual problem was easy, I think the additional comments about dependence on 
economy and other such “soft” analysis helps. Feedback was that I cracked the case………. 
