===== PDF p119 =====
Establishing the case
Case: Mosquito Repellant
Accenture: mock interview
Your client is a consumer packaged goods 
company, located in Massachusetts, US. They 
manufacture and sell two mosquito repellant products. 
One of them is an esthetic/decorative product to be 
used outside, e.g. on a balcony or a porch, and the 
other is a mosquito swatter/zapper (a simple racket). 
The client manufactures the products outside of the US 
and sells them in the US.
The profit margins in years 2006 and 2007 were 20% 
and 0%, respectively. The client would like to 
understand what caused the decline in margins and is 
looking for three to four ideas on how to boost the 
margins.  
Problem statement narrative
The interviewee might get confused when it comes to the 
two products and might ask for more specific 
information. While the case is not about the specifics of 
the products, but rather profitability, you should not 
reveal/emphasize this fact from the outset and make 
sure that the interviewee understands what the products 
are about and how they function, i.e. the first product 
needs oil to burn certain substances that keep 
mosquitoes away, while the second product requires 
precision and speed in user‟s hands.   
Guidance for interviewer and information to be 
provided on request
115


===== PDF p120 =====
Sample solution element – issue tree & qualitative analysis
Candidate may propose analysis / action in:
Revenue: explore volume and 
price, historical data, trends, product 
specific data
Costs: explore fixed costs 
(PP&E, overhead) and variable costs 
(material labor)
Transportation: since the products are 
manufactured outside of the US and 
customers are presumably spread 
across the US, exploring transportation 
costs separately makes sense
Revenue and Costs
Industry: explore recent historical data 
and trends for the overall 
industry, specifically if there were 
any recent declines in customer 
demand and whether that was 
product specific. Explore causes for that. 
Competitors: understand the 
competitive landscape of the 
industry, major market players, their 
market shares, products, prices and 
geographic focuses, as well as the 
timing of their entry to the market.
Industry and Competitors
Overall: understand the company‟s 
customers by exploring their 
needs, demographics, loyalty, satisfactio
n with company‟s products and any 
recent changes in their behavior that 
could affect their needs and/or use of 
the products.
Demand: explore demand elasticity. 
Customers
Possible follow-up and 
guidance to interviewer
Possible follow-up and 
guidance to interviewer
Possible follow-up and 
guidance to interviewer
The interviewee could be probed on her 
understanding of fixed and variable 
costs by outlying them more specifically 
as suggested above. The interviewee 
should ask for product specific data to 
demonstrate her understanding on how 
a product mix affects overall financial 
performance of a company.  
The interviewee should demonstrate 
understanding of the industry (i.e. what 
are the competing products) and how 
(new and old) competitors can affect 
profitability of another company, e.g. 
through introducing a new product, new 
pricing strategy, advertising strategy 
etc. 
The interviewee should explore whether 
these characteristics hold for all 
customer or are rather product specific 
(product mix understanding).  
116


===== PDF p121 =====
Sample solution element – Math
The interviewer should not ask any specific math question. However, the interviewee should attempt to 
calculate the revenue, costs and profits for years 2006 and 2007, and understand how the product mix 
affected the financial. 
Math Question
The interviewee should quickly calculate the profits for 
2006 and 2007 ($0.2M or 20% and 0, respectively) and 
recognize that the decline in profits was due in part to the 
decline in revenues of the first product and in part due to 
the increase in variable costs.
Then, the interviewee should explore the reasons for the 
decline in revenues for the first product (e.g. change in 
price, new competitive product on the market, change in 
demand etc.) and the increase in variable costs (e.g. 
labor, material, transportation, distribution costs etc.). This is 
a good practice for “MECE” brainstorming. 
The reason for both lies in the increase in oil price. 
First, because the first product burns oil, customers became 
reluctant to purchase the product to avoid additional costs 
due to the increase costs of oil (decrease in revenue). 
Second, the transportation costs increased, which affected 
the company significantly due to their offshore production 
plant (increase in variable cost).  
Overall approach, good shortcuts & solution
(This information should be asked for by interviewee during 
the qualitative analysis already.)
Revenue: Total revenue was $1M in 2006 and $0.9M in 
2007. 
Costs: Total costs were $0.8M in 2006 and $0.9M in 2007. 
Information to provide up front
Revenue split: In 2006 revenue was split equally between 
the two products. In 2007 the revenue for the first product 
dropped to $0.4M.
Cost split: Fixed costs remained the same from 2006 to 
2007 ($0.5M), while variable costs increase from $0.3 in 
2006 to $0.4M in 2007. 
Provide information if asked
117


===== PDF p122 =====
Sample solution element – recommendation et al.
The decline in profits was in part due to the decrease in revenues for the first product and in part due to the increased 
transportation costs (both because of the increase in oil price). The client requested three ideas to boost their revenues; 
first, they should explore the possibility of reducing transportation costs either through finding less expansive providers 
or moving their production plant closer to their customers in the US. Second, they should reconsider their product 
mix, introducing products that are less depended or independent of oil or other substance whose price may vary 
considerably, and potentially removing their first product from the product mix. Finally, the should explore markets 
outside of the US.  
Recommendation
All three recommendations may cost the company more than they would save it. Therefore, a cost-benefit analysis for 
each of them would be necessary to prove/disprove their viability (e.g. savings in transportation costs v. increase in 
manufacturing costs). 
Risks
Cost-benefit analysis suggested above,  analysis of potential new products and their profitability for the 
company, and analysis of foreign markets. 
Next Steps
The interviewee should point to other factors that may 
affect the company‟s profitability such as any regulatory
changes (e.g. laws/ordinances prohibiting use of certain 
products or certain substances), which would affect 
company‟s products. The interviewee could also explore 
whether a 2007 was a peculiar year for mosquitoes (e.g. 
due to unusually low temperatures or under climate 
changes, mosquitoes did not pollute the US as in previous 
years), which in turn would affect the demand after the 
company‟s products. Finally, pointing to the economic 
recession and changes in oil price upfront would add 
points too. 
BONUS
118
