===== PDF p43 =====
39 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
HELICOPTER 
Category: Profitability 
 
 
Question (posed by interviewer): 
 
The firm’s new client has come to you with a new business idea.  He wants to start a helicopter 
service between midtown Manhattan and JFK airport.  How would you begin to evaluate this 
opportunity and what are the basic economics behind it?  He has asked you to brief him on your 
conclusion in a 1 minute elevator ride from the 50th floor to the ground floor. 
 
This question requires a cost/benefit analysis as well as an estimate for market size.  
Because the interviewer explicitly asked for the “economics,” you know you will have to do 
some basic number crunching.  While coming up with an analysis, the candidate should 
also make sure to include alternatives as to what else the client could do with the helicopter.  
One possible approach would begin by asking why the client wants this new route, in order 
to try and keep in mind the company’s objectives.  
 
Suggested Sample Response: 
 
Does the client’s helicopter service idea have anything to do with the company’s current business 
activities?   
 
Yes, the client has a fleet of helicopters it purchased during the dot-com boom days and has 
excess capacity 
 
So the fixed costs for purchasing the helicopters are already sunk.  Can you tell me the costs 
involved with the up keep of one helicopter? 
 
What would you expect the costs involved to be? 
 
I would assume some of the costs that go along with owning a helicopter include: 
 
Pilot salary/benefits 
 
Maintenance 
 
Gas 
 
Insurance 
 
Taxes 
 
That’s a good list.  Let’s just say that these all cost about $20,000 per helicopter per month. 
 
How many helicopters does the client have? 
 
They recently sold off most of the fleet, but retained two helicopters for company use. 
 


===== PDF p44 =====
40 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
At this point you have determined the cost portion, you should now move on to the revenue 
stream. 
 
The people who would most value the time saving and convenience of this offer would be top 
executives.  The economics are similar to a limo service.  In order to determine the revenue, I 
will need to know how much to charge per person and the number of people who would use this 
service.  For the latter, I can estimate this based on the total possible capacity.   
 
To begin, I’ll assume the service is used mainly during rush hours when convenience is most 
greatly valued.  This includes four hours in the early morning and four hours in the evening, or 
eight “rush hours” worth of flights a day.  Assuming a helicopter can land every 15 minutes, 
there would be 32 flights per helicopter with potential passengers to pick up (four 15-minute 
intervals in each hour * eight relevant hours = 32).  
 
Assuming 10 passengers per flight and a 10% usage rate, I would expect each flight to carry 
about one person (10*0.1=1), which equals 32 passengers per helicopter per day.  I would also 
assume that the service is not used through out the week, but only early on and late in the week.  
Let’s say it’s most needed about 16 hours per week.  This gives me a weekly customer potential 
per helicopter of 64 customers and a monthly potential of 256 passengers per helicopter 
(64*4=256).  For ease of calculations, I’ll round this to about 250 people per month per 
helicopter.   
 
Now that I have a number for customers, I’ll need to figure out how much to charge them.  At 
the very least, the price should cover the $25,000 monthly costs per helicopter.  As an initial 
price, let’s assume we charged $100 per person.  This would yield $100*250 = $25,000 in 
revenue per helicopter.  For a month, this would give us a profit of $5,000 per helicopter 
($25,500-$20,000 = $5,000).  For two helicopters, that’s $10,000 in total profit per month.  
 
So what other issues are involved? 
 
Well, I would like to know the alternatives to running this service, such as selling the helicopters. 
To see whether it’s a good investment, I would find out the life of the helicopters as well as their 
saleable value, and see if the discounted cash flows during the life of the helicopters exceeds 
what I could get by selling them today.   
 
That’s a good way to consider the investment.  Assume it makes sense to run the service.  What 
else should you consider? 
 
I would want to know what additional sources of revenue the helicopter could generate when it’s 
not being used.  For instance, the client can rent it out for private use, especially in the summer 
when the wealthy are looking to be out in the Hamptons or other vacation homes in the area.  In 
addition, the client could work with the city to set up an emergency helicopter service for 
hospitals during off hours.   
 
That’s a good idea.  So what would you recommend to the client? 


===== PDF p45 =====
41 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
 
At initial glance, this seems to be a good business idea.  Given initial assumptions that will need 
to be validated, annual profits could be $120,000.  There may also be other revenue streams to 
consider since there will be excess capacity during off airport transport hours.  However, there 
are other issues that will need to be tested to see if they will affect the cost structure such as legal 
and regulatory issues.  My suggestion for next steps would be to validate all economic 
assumptions and to look into legal rules and restrictions. 
 
Remember that it’s okay to make certain assumptions but always do a sanity check at the 
end.  The interviewer will look for that.  Also, you don’t have to do complicated 
calculations.  No one expects you to cover all issues in the economic model, as long as 
you’ve brought up the pertinent issues.  Lastly, remember to “think out loud”.   
 
 
 
