===== PDF p107 =====
Practice Cases – Case 19: Direct Mail Campaign 
Deloitte. 
 
 
103
(Source: Interview mini case from Deloitte Round II, RSB 2006 Casebook Case#19) 
 
Context 
Our client is a telecom fortune 50 company. One of its divisions (landline) is facing 
high churn (3% per yr). They have launched a direct mail campaign to try to re-
attain some customers. How can they make their direct mail strategy more effective? 
They have kept all the information they had on our customers. 
 
A sample approach interviewee could use: 
 
To make the direct mail strategy more effective, I’d like to focus on three areas. 
 
First I’d like to have a better understanding of our customers so we could focus the campaign 
on the right customer segment. Second, I want to make sure that the content of the direct 
mail is effective. Third, I want to make sure that the channel we use to deliver the campaign is 
effective. 
 
To understand our customers better, first I’d like to know why customers switched to other 
providers. It could be because our competitors offer lower price, or better quality, or better 
customer services, or more selections.  
 
Interviewer: There is no significant difference in the quality of service provided. It is 
standard landline service. The client also provides other services such as broadband, 
and wireless to meet diversified customer needs. Therefore, the main reason for 
customers to switch is price.  
 
(Note: Interviewer should guide interviewee to discuss customer segmentation.) 
 
Interviewer: What are the different ways to segment customers? 
 
A good answer may include the following: 
- 
Customers can be segmented by different needs. For example, business customers 
might have different needs from individual consumers. Within the business 
segment, large enterprise customers might have different needs from 
small/medium business owners. 
- 
Customers can be segmented by life-time economic value by looking at revenue 
generated by customer, costs incurred to serve that customer and the number of 
years the customer stays with us. Since we have kept all the information about 
each customer, it shouldn’t be hard to calculate customer economic value. 
 
The direct mail campaign should target at customers who have had high life-time economic 
value or have potential to bring in high economic value.  
 
The content of the campaign should focus on what customers value the most and target at the 
reason why customers left in the first place. Since customers leave mainly because of price, 
the campaign can focus on current promotions and discounts.   
 
It’s also important to effectively utilize distribution channels. For example, we could use higher 
cost channel such as standard US mail to reach customers with higher profitability, and use 
lower cost channel such as internet to reach customers with lower profitability. 
 
(One important point is to realize that the cost of serving every customer is not the same. 
Costs of serving customer depend on frequency of customer calling the service center, how 
often bills are not paid on time; etc. The client can use the data to compute cost of serving the 
customer. Hence, it’s important to segment customers based on “profitability” and not 
revenue.)
