===== PDF p60 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
56 
 
 
Difficulty:  Medium 
Quant: Medium 
Company: OC&C Strategy 
 
9.16 Heavy-Duty Soap (OC&C Strategy) 
Part 1: Context 
Our client, Clean Inc., is a manufacturer of heavy-duty soap with 
most of its £200m in revenues concentrated in Europe and the 
US. They sell soap to four client segments: healthcare, industry, 
commercial, and food. 
They have asked us to help them think about potential growth 
opportunities in both their existing markets and elsewhere. 
Part 2: Market Sizing 
Let us start by looking at one of Clean’s core markets, the UK, 
where the company generates 20% of its sales. How would you 
go about sizing the market for Clean’s products in the UK? 
[A good answer will introduce two possible approaches (bottom- 
up and top-down) and discuss benefits/drawbacks  of  each.  The 
selected approach should be bottom-up, at which point the 
interviewer will provide you with a data table : 
 
 
a) Introduce approach 
• Market Size = number of Employees (i.e. users of soap) * 
Spend per Employee 
• Specify differences in both inputs by client segment 
b) Analyse each input separately 
• Spend per Employee = Usage per Person * Spend per Usage 
» Specify time as part of calculations (per day, per year) 
» (Bonus) Mention distinction between MSP and RSP in 
value sizing of market 
» (Bonus) Mention penetration rate by segment (in the UK 
it’s 100% for this case) 
• Candidate should proactively estimate numbers based on 
sensible assumptions 
» Fill in the blanks in the data table in Exhibit 1 
• (Bonus) Sense checks you answer. For example: 
» Market share of Clean in UK is 40% 
» Personal experience on soap usage (amplified to account 
for heavier use) 
• (Bonus) Mention Impact of external factors, such as regulation, 
health scares, innovation, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 3: Growth Opportunities 
Question A: Now let us talk about the potential growth opportunities 
for Clean. Before we get into specifics, how would you think about 
the ways that our client could grow? 
Answer A: Here you should introduce a relevant framework to 
identify areas of growth. Examples frameworks include: 
• 2x2 with New/Old Products vs Existing/New Customers works 
well 
• Domestic v. International is an important angle 
• Innovation and new products is also key 
• (Bonus) Identify growth drivers tied to either Price (Spend per 
Employee) or Volume (Usage per Employee) 
• (Bonus) Call out likely evolution of Number of Employees in 
each sector (e.g., declining in Industry due to automation) 
Question B: Can you think of a few potential growth opportunities 
for each of the areas you have identified? 
Answer B: open ended – no correct answer 
Part 4: New Product 
Context: Clean has been working for the past 10 years on an 
innovative new product: an electronic group monitoring system for 
soap usage. Their product consists of a sensor attached to a soap 
dispenser that registers every time someone uses it; sensors are 
wirelessly linked to a central database to generate reports. 
Pilot trials have started in two hospitals and the initial results have 
been encouraging. It is now up to us to advise the CEO if he 
should go ahead with the project or not. 
Question A: What do you think will be the impact of this new 
product for the company? The market? What are the implications 
for Clean’s strategy? 
Answer A: you should structure your answer to cover most of the 
following: 
• Size of opportunity (potential market) 
• Time horizon for payback 
• Investment required 
• Profitability of product 
• IRR/NPV or other kind of internal threshold used for go/no-go 
decisions 


===== PDF p61 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Expected market share of Clean 
• Other competitors 
• Other types of products that achieve the same results (e.g., 
badges on users) 
• Sectors to which this product would be attractive 
• Demand and expected take-up of potential clients 
• (Bonus) external drivers to make product attractive (eg, high 
cost of low hand-washing compliance in healthcare) 
Question B: Based on the data in Exhibit 3, what are the expected 
profits by 2018 if they decide to go ahead with this product? 
Answer B 
 
 
• Assume linear market size growth (2014: £10m, 2015: £20m, 
2016: £30m, 2017: £40m, 2018: £50m) 
• Calculate yearly revenues with 60% share of product and 60% 
Clean market share 
» 2014: £3.6m; 2015: £7.2m; 2016: £10.8m; 2017: £14.4m; 
2018: £18m 
» Total Revenues: £54m 
• 30% Margin = £16.2m 
• Investment required = £13m (£5m in 2014, £2m in 2015, £2m 
in 2016, £2m in 2017, £2m in 2018) 
• Net Profit: £3.2m (25% return) 
