===== PDF p56 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
52 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
  
A publishing company has 2 divisions, one that prints SEC disclosures and the other that prints 
mutual funds’ prospectus. In the first division, the shareholder communications are printed and 
sent to all the shareholders. It entered the mutual fund prospectus business 10 years back, and 
this has helped with revenue growth. It had revenue growth of 25% over 5 years and then 15% 
over the next 5 years. The CEO wants to know why the rate of growth has slowed and what he 
can do about it. 
 
Could you give me some more information about the client’s business? Does it produce content, 
maintain a distribution list, solicit firms directly, etc.? 
 
!"The client’s services are retained by Investment Banks. When a company needs to access 
the capital markets or make SEC disclosures, it is required by law to send the 
information to all its shareholders. The company uses an Investment Bank in order to 
access the markets, and the bank gives the information to the client, who prints it and 
hands it to the company, which in turn mails it to the shareholders. So the client does not 
produce content or maintain its own distribution lists. 
 
Ok, let me start by looking at the revenues. R = P*Q. Could you tell me a bit about the pricing in 
this market. 
 
!"Prices have been constant. 
 
Prices have been constant… this indicates that the quantity of prospectus printed has declined. 
However, given the bull market, the overall number of investors has grown, which should have 
resulted in an increase in the number of prospectus printed. Could you tell me about the client’s 
market share?  
 
!"The market share has been constant. 
 
Then the other option is that companies are communicating to their shareholders in different 
ways. Have more firms started using the Internet to communicate with the shareholders, some 
service like ProxyVote.com? 
 
!"Actually the case is in 1998, before online shareholder communication was possible. So 
ignore the effect of the Internet in this case. 
 
Ok, so no Internet effects… but the prices have gone down, which then means that the quantity 
of shareholder communications must have gone down. However, this doesn’t seem reasonable 
since the number of investors has increased, and the number of stock, bond offerings etc. has also 
increased. Can you tell me about the quantity of shareholder prospectus booklets printed? 
 
!"Your reasoning is correct; the number of booklets printed has gone up.  
 
The quantity has increased, the price has remained the same, but revenue growth has decreased 
this doesn’t make sense. Could you show me the revenues for the 2 divisions? 
 


===== PDF p57 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
53 
!"Mutual Funds prospectus: $100 million in 1988, $300 million in 1993, $600 million in 
1998.  
!"Shareholder communications: $500 million in 1988, $1 billion in 1993, $1.7 billion in 
1998. 
 
Ok, so the decline in revenue growth is due to the shareholder communication division. 
Hmmmm…. Quantities have increased and prices have stayed constant….. How does the client 
charge customers? 
 
!"The client charges them on a per page basis. 
 
A per page basis! This means that the number of pages in a prospectus have gone down.  
 
!"Right.  
 
What could be the reasons behind it? You’ve mentioned that the client doesn’t have any control 
over the content. Could the customers be reducing the amount to be printed to control costs?  
 
!"Shareholder communication standards are mandated by the SEC, so the customers have 
to print what is required by the SEC. 
 
Then it looks like the SEC is the cause of the reduction in number of pages per prospectus. 
 
!"Yes. In 1993 the SEC mandated the easy English usage rule, which forced companies to 
reduce all the legal jargon that was difficult to understand. So what options does the 
client have to raise revenue growth rates? 
 
R = P * Q. The options before the client are to raise prices or to raise the quantity printed. It 
could achieve the latter by gaining market share, increasing the number of pages, or by 
expanding into other lines of business.  
 
!"Ok, examine the options for me. 
 
Before I do that I would like to find out a bit more about the competitive landscape. Does the 
client have any differentiator? What is their competition like? 
 
!"There are 3-4 firms that offer the printing services. There is not much of a difference 
between them. Investment banks use one or the other’s services for a while and then 
switch to another one if there is some personality clash. Prices are the same and so is 
the service. 
 
Ok, based on that information, let’s take a look at the option of raising prices. The client’s 
services are required when firms access capital markets, requiring shareholder communication. 
When firms access the capital markets, they hire Investment Banks, and I would guess that our 
client’s costs are much less than those of Investment Banks. Is this true? 
 
!"Yes, it is. 


===== PDF p58 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
54 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
Ok, then raising prices is a viable option. But I would like to check for competitive reaction. The 
Investment banks could choose a competing firm. However, you did mention that price usually 
doesn’t come into the picture, so I feel that raising prices a bit is a viable option. The next one is 
to gain market share. Is there any way that our client can differentiate itself? Can it build a 
relationship with some Investment Banks and provide better service? 
 
!"Not really, there are few options for doing so. 
 
Ok, so that rules out the market share option. What about printing more pages? While the content 
isn’t under the client’s control, it could play around with the font size, formatting to increase the 
number of pages. 
 
!"No. Everything is mandated by the SEC, including the format. 
 
So that option is ruled out as well. So other than raising prices, the client can increase revenue 
growth rates by entering other markets, say the market for printing annual reports. It is similar to 
the mutual funds’ prospectus market and can leverage its existing connections with forms, 
Investment Banks. 
 
!"Ok. What about entering the publishing of something entirely different, like textbooks? 
 
That’s also viable, though I feel that the annual report market might be closer to its competency, 
give it’s mutual funds prospectus printing division. 
 
!"Good. 
 
Should have been more structured, split up the 2 divisions from the beginning itself. 
 
