===== PDF p32 =====
CASE 14:  CELL PHONES (BCG – Round 1)         
OPERATIONS/ SUPPLY CHAIN 
 
Your client is a cell phone carrier in Western Europe in the late 1990s when growth is 
exploding.  The market as a whole is approximately 60% penetrated.  Your client is concerned 
because acquisitions costs (the cost to acquire a new customer) have been increasing at a 20% 
CAGR over the past few years.   
 
Your client wants to know why costs are increasing and what they should do. 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Acquisition costs largely fall into two categories: 
1. Handset subsidies (phones are given to clients for free) 
2. Commissions to independent stores who sell the phones 
• Total annual acquisition costs are 200 euros per customer. 
 
 
 
27
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
(The interviewer preferred not to have a framework set up and just have a dialogue). 
 
Q:  First I’d like to know more about the handset subsidies.  Have costs been constant over time?  
Have we always given them out for free?  How much of the total spent do they account for? 
A:  Yes, we have always given them out.  Total handset spending is 100 euros but they only 
account for 5% of the total CAGR.  What does that make the growth in commissions? 
My answer: 35% 
 
Q:  Thinking about distribution, do we have any other outlets to sell our products.  Are the stores 
equally distributed from a geographic standpoint? 
A: No 
 
Q: How does the commission structure work?  Are there different % paid based on different plans?  
What has been the distribution of these plans now and in the past? 
A: Let’s assume that we have only one plan for simplicity all of the commissions are paid against it.  
These plans represent the entire increase in commissions – there are no other marketing expenses 
etc.  Additionally, prices of the plan have been pretty consistent over time, so that is not accounting 
for the increase in total commissions. 
 
Q:  I’m assuming that since commissions are increasing, it is becoming increasingly difficult to sell 
to customers.  As such, I’d like to explore our competitors and their plans?  Have more entered the 
market?  Are their plans unique when compared to ours?  How is their distribution channel?  How 
are their commissions when compared to ours? 
A:  The competitors have been consistent over time although competition is increasing since 
everyone now wants a phone.  Market share is consistent across the players and their plans are 
non-differentiated.  They have similar distribution channels (note – this was the interviewer’s 
response word for word.  In reality, I later discovered they are the same distribution channels 
down to the store).  Commissions have been increasing at a similar rate to what we have seen. 
 
Q:  Ok, let’s talk about customers.  Have we seen any differences in where they go to buy cell 
phones?  Is their a preference in Europe for certain types of plans or phones and how do we compete 
from that perspective?  
A: Customers are buying cell phones through the same channels as always and our plans and 
phones are competitive? 


===== PDF p33 =====
Interviewee’s Solution (cont.): 
 
Q:   Well if nothing else in the landscape has changed, it must just be that we have to give competitive 
commissions to our sales people to stay in business?  Tell me, do they sell phones of competitors as 
well? 
A:  Yes, they do.  That’s why we have to incentivize them so well.  Now what do you think we could 
do about it. 
 
Well, I think there are a number of things: 
• We could somehow signal the market that we are not going to continue to give escalating 
commissions through a PR program. 
• We could try to differentiate our product offerings both in terms of the plan and the phones we 
offer. 
• We could spend more on marketing (and hopefully, less on commission) in the hopes of helping 
the consumer determine what type of phone they want before entering the store. 
• We could try to establish different distribution chains to reduce total costs; i.e. the Internet. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
A good way to structure this case is as follows: 
• First I would want to understand the primary drivers of the increase in acquisition costs. To do 
this I would like to find information on: 
o each of the components that make up the total acquisition cost elements that make up 
acquisition costs and  
o how much each of those elements has been growing 
• Once we have identified the source of growth in acquisition costs I would then want to explore 
the options available to reduce those costs. 
o In doing this I would want to focus on the aspects of costs that are the most significant 
and that have been growing the fastest 
o I would also want to benchmark our costs against those of our competitors to determine 
whether they use strategies that are more cost effective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
