===== PDF p54 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
50 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Easy 
Company: Delta Partners 
 
9.13 Telco A Security Services 
 
 
 
Note 
• This is a broad, qualitative stragegy case and is to be given in a very open and conversational manner. No hard 
data is provided - instead, the interviewer should ask the candidate to come up with assumptions and estimates 
to drive the case forward. Therefore, there is no “right” answer, but the candidate must be able to come up with 
reasonable assumptions and then follow them logically to a conclusion. 
Problem 
• Teleco A is the nation’s largest provider of local telephone services. They are considering entering the home 
security market. Should they? 
Expected questions and answers 
Framework/ 
structure 
The candidate should explain what framework / structure he / she is going to use to solve the problem 
Good Answer: 
• I am going to look at the market size and what share of that the telco can get based on 
- Competition 
- Internal capabilities 
- xxx 
• Then I will look at the cost structure to deploy this services for the telco 
• If this mets xx, yy conditions then I would say yes, go for it 
Priority discussion areas 
Market size 
If the candidate asks for the size of the market, make him/her come up with assumptions and calculate the total 
market size. A sample calculation based on sample assumptions follows: 
• Total Households in US: 100M 
• % Households Serviced by Telco A: 50% 
• % Households That Can Afford Service: 50% 
• Annual Subscription Price: $250 
• Total Addressable Market: 100M x 50% x 50% x $250 = $6.25B 
Cost 
structure 
Ask the candidate to discuss what the cost structure might be for Telco A to enter this market. What are the fixed 
costs? Variable costs? Does Telco A have a cost advantage over other players? 
Good Answer: The business has very little fixed cost beyond the infrastructure already installed in potential 
customers’ homes (i.e. the existing phone wiring). Customer would need door / window / motion sensors installed, 
which could be done by a third-party installer and billed to the customer at cost + markup and owned by the 
customer 
Variable costs are also very small - essentially just the cost to maintain enough call centre operators to dispatch 
police when alarms are triggered. Telco A does not seem to have much or a cost advantage over other players, 
since they are all using the common carrier phone network. Telco A might have some economies of scale in 
operating the call centre, but this effect would be slight. 


===== PDF p55 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected questions and answers (1) 
Customer 
segment 
Ask the candidate to speculate on the various customer segments and their relative importance, size, and value 
Good Answer: We can reasonably divide the customer base into urban and suburban customers, having different 
needs and different price sensitivities. Urban customers are likely to have lower incomes but a high willingness to 
pay due to thd increased crime rate of the city. Suburban customers are likely to have a higher income but a lower 
perceived threat due to a lower suburban crime rate. By first-degree price discrimnation, it may be reasonable to 
charge the suburban customers a higher price because they are presumably less price sensitive. We can assume 
that 50% of customers are urban and 50% suburban 
Pricing 
Have the candidate come up with a pricing scheme and prices for each of their identified customer segments. There 
is no right answer, but they must justify why they are setting the price they are. Some areas they might consider: 
• Insurance companies generally give breaks on homeowner’s insurance for having an alarm. This will increase the 
EVA to the customer and can inform pricing. 
• What other services to homeowners pay for monthly? Cable, phone, DSL. How are the values of these services 
perceived compared to the value of the alarm? 
• Pricing will need to be competitive with other market players. 
• The candidate might assume a net margin based on the competitive landscape and use this with assumed 
market size to determine attractiveness rather than determining an end-consumer price. 
2nd priority discussion areas 
Competition 
• The market is composed of a large number of mom-and-pop alarm company operators. No firm has over5% 
market share overall, although there are some strong regional players 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected questions and answers (2) 
Regulation 
• The market is not regulated and government regulation is not expected to play a role 
Marketing 
Ask the candidate what advantages Telco A might have in marketing via a vis its competitors. Keep points the 
candidate should identify include: 
• Telco A has monthly customer contact with a large pool of potential alarm services customers through its phone bills 
• Telco A already has brand loyalty for phone service, why not alarm service? 
• Shear size of the company (and deep pockets) make it more able to achieve scale economies in marketing 
and reach a broad audience. 
Conclusion 
A star condidate will see that his/her time is nearly up and will present a recommendation for the client without 
prompting. If the interview is within 3 minutes of the end, ask: 
Good Answer: Yes. Telco A possesses several small but important competitive advantages for entering into this 
new market. It has economies of scale in call center operations that will enable it to be highly cost-competitive in 
operating a security network. It has an established brand that the consumer associates with reliability as well as 
with networking and communications - the primary function of a home security system. More importantly, Telco A 
already reaches 50M households every month through its phone services bill that it could leverage to launch and 
market this new service. Also, the company has deep pockets and the ability to advertise such a service far more 
effectively than the small, regional competitors. 
The size of the opportunity is large enough for Telco A to consider. Assuming a potential market size of $6B in Telco 
A’s territory, even at only a 10% share, Telco A can add $600M in revenue. Given the low cost structure of this 
business and the high perceived value to the customer, this is likely to be highly profitable revenue as well. 
With Telco A’s marketing clout and customer reach, the company should be able to gain significant market share 
and become the national leader in this. 
