===== PDF p34 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
30 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Hard 
Company: BCG 
 
9.3 
Gas Retail 
Your client is the major operator (monopolist) in one of the largest 
European gas market. His business includes two major activities: 
Gas sales to households and firms (gas bought from large 
producers in Russia, Norway, Algeria…), and Gas transportation 
from the national border,  where it is delivered by the producer,  to 
the end consumers. This implies the existence of a large 
ensemble of infrastructures: transportation network, distribution 
network, storage equipment, methane terminals… 
 
Let’s discuss the challenges on the natural gas market after 
market liberalization in Europe. 
 
Situation 
Concretely, the market’s deregulation means 
• The end of the monopoly for the gas sales; the arrival of new 
competitors 
• The preservation of the monopoly on transportation, but under 
the surveillance of an independent authority that guarantees 
equal access to all competitors 
 
Your  client is at the head of the purchases/sales department.  
He is in the following situation: 
• Today, company market share is 100% 
• At a certain point in the next years the market will at once 
be opened to competition 
• (which is a simplified way of putting it since in reality there 
will be stages) 
 
Client’s question 
About the gas sale activity that will be opened to competition: 
What will be the level of competitive intensity at opening? What 
actors are likely to become my competitors? 
 
Evaluate the case 
According to you, how many and what types of competitors are 
likely to enter the market? (Structure) 
 
I believe I would need to evaluate the market attractiveness 
(market growth, profitability/margin, risks) and the entry barriers 
(gas availability, brand). I would need to ask the following questions: 
What are the rules of the game/key success factors (access      
to suppliers, customer intimacy, cost advantages, branding…)? 
How are other players positioned to enter the market? 
What are their competitive advantages thanks to synergies with 
other activities (electricity, services …)? 
 
Let us focus on the gas retail sale activity’s attractiveness. There 
are three dimensions you should consider: the natural gas 
market’s growth potential, the profitability of this activity and the 
risks associated with it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let us start with the market’s growth potential. What are the 
market’s growth levers? (Structure) 
 
I would differentiate between firms and households. The key 
levers by client type would be: Households: network penetration, 
share of gas vs. other energies; consumption of gas/household 
(climate, isolation…) 
Firms: same as households, plus industry growth, productivity, 
competitiveness with other energy forms 
 
Given the market’s main growth levers for the firms’ segment and 
for the households’ segment, do you think that the market will 
strongly grow, stagnate, or decrease? (Judgment) 
 
For the households, I would estimate the rise of penetration 
(network extension) but, overall, I think the consumption will 
decrease due to global warming and to better built houses. For the 
firms, I think it will decrease, especially in industries that consume 
a lot of gas (general price and risk issues). 
 
So what is your conclusion? (Synthesis, So what) 
 
I think there will be weak or inexistent growth. A new entrant will 
have to take clients from the major player. 
 
Can you imagine what a gas retailer’s cost structure is? 
(turnover = 100)? (Synthesis, Structure) 
 
I believe it would include the energy itself (cost of goods – gas), 
the infrastructure cost and sales and marketing costs (commercial). 
 
Here is a simplified cost structure: gas – 50%, infrastructures – 
40%, commercial costs – 7% and the margin is around 3%. What 
cost advantage can a new entrant expect to build for each one  of 
these costs? (Judgment) 
 
Most probably, there is a small opportunity of differentiation 
through costs: 
• Gas is sourced at comparable prices 
• Infrastructure prices are identical for all competitors 
• New entrants have to invest rather more in marketing 
• New entrants are not expected to have a productivity lever 
and only have a small pricing lever. 
 
I would have to check these assumptions. 
 
Let us put ourselves in the shoes of a household client whose 
yearly gas invoice amounts to € 500. What is the price reduction 
potential for a new entrant? Can you give a rough estimate? 
(Judgment, Rigor) 


===== PDF p35 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If I assume I can reduce commercial/marketing costs by 33% (500 
x 7% x 33% = 11.55)  and I allow a 50% lower margin    (500 x 3% 
x 50% = 7.5), then a new competitor can reduce the gas price 
around € 15–20/year (11.55+7.5=19). This might allow it to 
compete with the established client. Marketing costs can be 
reduced if the new entrant is already established in other energy 
markets and benefits from scale and known brand name. 
 
What can we conclude on a new entrant’s margin level? (Synthesis) 
 
Margin will necessarily have to be weak or inexistent to attract 
clients and draw away from established player. 
 
Let us now consider the risks borne by our retailer. In order to 
simplify, let us focus on what is called the climatic risk. The sales 
volumes will vary a lot depending on the year, whether the winter 
is cold or not. During a “warm” year, let’s suppose that the heating 
volumes decrease by 10%, that the cost of supply/gas are totally 
variable, that the commercial costs are totally fixed, that the 
infrastructure costs are partly flexible, at 70%. What will be our 
gas retailer’s margin? (Structure, Rigor) 
 
I am basing my analysis on the sales and cost structure of a 
normal year (turnover = 100). Then I calculate the value of each 
cost block for a warm year, also the margin and compare with the 
margin in a normal year. 
 
Cold vs. warm 
Sales: 
100 vs. 90 (-10%) 
 
Gas: 
50 vs. 45 (-10%) 
Infrastructure: 40 vs. 38.8 (30% of 40 is variable, makes 12, 
10% reduction makes 1.2) Commercial: 7 stay 7 
Total cost: 97 vs. 90.8 
Margin: 
3 vs. -0.8 
In a warm year, it is more expensive to sell gas, so it is a high 
risk business. 
 
What can we deduce from this risk calculation? (Judgment) 
 
The climatic risk is too high to justify the small margin in a normal year. 
 
Your first meeting with your client is tomorrow morning. What can 
you tell him/her to answer his/her question based on the analyses 
that we have just done together? (Synthesis) 
Well, the market  is  not  that  attractive  and  new  entrants  are a 
weak threat. 
 
Finally, it looks like our major player does not have to worry; the 
gas retailer activity’s attractiveness is so weak that one would 
have to be stupid to venture in it at its opening! But why would    it 
be a big mistake to tell our client not to worry? (Creativity) 
We are not working on the right strategic segment:  the  gas retail 
sale segment in not independent of the electricity sale and 
services, as soon as the monopoly disappears. We have been 
influenced by the client’s historical view. 
 
In fact there is a bias in our reasoning from the start. What is it? 
(Creativity) 
 
We have looked at the gas market on a  stand-alone basis.  But 
we need to take into account that the rules of the game might 
change and that other energy providers might enter the market. 
Those providers might offer additional products to the gas client: 
electricity, oil, services or other products. 
 
Are there other levers that would enable a player to enter the gas 
market in a profitable way? (Creativity) 
 
By offering other energy products or services and products, there 
can be synergies with the gas supply: 
• Channel diffusion/delivery costs 
• Margins from other services can cover production risk 
 
On the other hand, there could be cost synergies on the 
commercialization: 
• Client back-offices could combine gas and electricity sales 
• Brand and client acquisition 
 
Who could the other new players in the gas market be? (Judgment) 
 
Potential new players that bring additional value to the client could 
be major electricity firms, major oil producers and/or major 
retailers. For the electricity firms, synergies would be mainly based 
on the commercialization cost synergies, also for retailers. For the 
oil producers, there are synergies on the supply side. 
 
What can we finally say to our client? (Judgment) 
 
The threat is real; the firm’s traditional strategic vision must be 
questioned due to the emergence of the new market conditions 
and rules of the game. Examples of dangerous players are large 
power firms, oil producers if they don’t have more profitable 
investments to make and a partnership between a large European 
energy player and a large retailer. 
