===== PDF p45 =====
CASE 20:  HOTEL (POST 9-11) (BCG – Round 1)        
 
BCG has been hired after 9/11 to look into quantifying the amount of damage to revenue 
streams that has occurred in the Manhattan hotel business.  How would you go about 
determining / quantifying the impact, and how would you structure a recovery plan? 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Hotels use a metric called “Revpar” which is equal to the average daily room rate * % occupancy.  
Revpar was $200 before 9/11, $125 for the remainder of 2001, $150 for 2002, and $175 for 2003. 
• I was asked to assume that if 9/11 had not occurred that the Revpar would have been flat for the 
entire time period. 
• I was told that there were 100,000 hotel rooms in Manhattan.  I was then asked to quantify the 
revenue impact. 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
• I structured my discussion by segmenting the market into US business travelers, international 
business travelers and leisure travelers.  I also tried to make a separation between individual hotels 
and chain hotels, but it was clear that the case giver was only interested in looking at things on an 
aggregate basis. 
 
• The key, I think, to doing well in this case is to focusing not only on quantifying the damage, but 
also to coming up with creative suggestions for a recovery plan. 
 
 
 
40
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
The quantification question is relatively straightforward multiplication once the candidate has 
extracted the relevant data by asking appropriate questions. 
 
The question of a recovery plan is more difficult. I would approach this question using the following 
framework: 
• What were the primary categories of hotel customers before 9/11? e.g. tourists, business etc 
• How much did each category pay? i.e. how much was each category worth? 
• How much has each category stopped traveling? e.g. where are the biggest losses? 
• Focusing on those categories with the biggest losses what are the main reasons why they have 
stopped traveling? e.g. is it a perception of safety in NY for tourists? Is it a perception of 
airport delays for business travelers? Etc 
• Once the main causes for the most important categories are identified I would try to develop 
solutions focused on addressing these causes. This may take the form of marketing and sales 
promotions or alternatively lobbying the government to take measures to make travel easier etc 
depending on exactly what causes are identified as being most important to the most important 
category of customer. 
 
 
