===== PDF p20 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
16 
 
Case 4: Italian Paper 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm: Bain 
Round: 2005 Summer, First 
Content: Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is an Italian paper manufacturer.  They make high-end glossy and matte paper that’s 
used in corporate brochures, magazine ads for Gucci and Prada, etc.  It’s a commodity product. 
 
They have one factory that produces 150,000 tons of paper a year.  90% of this is sold into the 
Italian market, which gives it about a 20% market share.  The other 10% is sold outside of Italy.  
 
They would like to build another factory to produce another 150,000 tons a year.  This would 
cost $100 million.  They would like us to tell them whether or not this is a good idea. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach:  This case is asking you to determine whether it makes sense to build 
additional capacity, i.e. can your company be profitable in the future based on this investment? 
This will depend on the current and future market dynamics, which can be explored in a number 
of ways. 
 
Having the Three Cs in your head will help you ask the right questions: 
• Customers: Who are they? Is there enough market demand for additional capacity? 
• Competitors: Who are they? Where are they? What market share do they have? How are 
their prices relative to ours? Can we capture any of their share? 
• Company: How much will this additional expansion cost the company, and what will the 
benefits be?  Does this fit with the company’s current plans? 
 
Knowing the answers to these questions will then help you determine whether it makes sense to 
add capacity. You can also probe whether a new factory is the right way to go, or whether it 
might be more feasible and profitable to add capacity to an existing plant, acquire another 
company, etc. 
 
Key facts: 
• The Italian market will continue to grow at about 10%. Germany is very hot and growing 
at about 15%. Other Eastern European markets are growing as well. 
• Your largest Italian competitor has 40% share. An international competitor has 10% and 
the other 30% is fragmented among small players. 


===== PDF p21 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
17 
 
• There are about 12 players and only 2 paper machine manufacturers in Europe. Everyone 
knows what everyone else is doing and nobody else is investing in additional capacity 
right now. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: I’d like to understand a few things to evaluate this decision. First, I’d like to 
explore the current market demand for paper. Then, I’d like to understand the current players in 
the market and how our company competes against them. Finally, I’d like to talk about the 
specifics of the investment proposed and what the NPV might be for that option versus others. 
 
I’ll start with the market demand in Italy. You mentioned that 135,000 tons is about 20% of the 
Italian market, which means that the Italian market is 675,000 tons. What are the projected trends 
for Italian market growth? 
 
Interviewer: Well, how would you go about finding that out? 
 
Interviewee: I might look at historical trends, but those are probably not that accurate because of 
the growth of the Internet. To get a more accurate picture of where the industry is going, I would 
interview the client’s customers, i.e. publishers, printers and ad agencies. I would ask them how 
they see their business prospects, what they are investing in now, what they want to invest in 
later, etc. 
 
Interviewer: OK. Through this, you discover that the Italian market will continue to grow at 
about 10%. Your largest Italian competitor has 40% share. An international competitor has 10% 
and the other 30% is fragmented among small players. 
 
Interviewee: Interesting. So that means the Italian market could only absorb an additional 
67,000 tons - not an additional 150,000 tons. It might make sense to look beyond Italy depending 
on the industry dynamics. What is the greater European market demand? 
 
Interviewer: Well, Germany is very hot and growing at about 15%. Other Eastern European 
markets are growing as well. 
 
Interviewee: Great. Who are the major competitors in those markets and what kind of share do 
they have? 
 
Interviewer: There are about 12 players and only 2 paper machine manufacturers in Europe. 
Everyone knows what everyone else is doing and nobody else is investing in additional capacity 
right now. 
 
Interviewee: Are they not investing because they don’t see opportunity, or because they don’t 
have the resources? 
 
Interviewer: It’s not clear. 


===== PDF p22 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
18 
 
 
Interviewee: Turning to the investment angle, how quickly can we make back the money on the 
investment in the new plant? 
 
Interviewer: I don’t know the specifics, but it wouldn’t take very long. What would you advise, 
knowing what you know now? 
 
Interviewee: While I don’t have all the information I would like, it seems that the European 
market could absorb the demand and since the competitors are not investing in additional 
capacity, this could be a great opportunity for the client to make inroads into a new market and 
increase revenues. Besides the new factory, they may also want to consider other growth options, 
such as building new capacity in an existing plant or acquiring a competitor. 
