===== PDF p45 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
INDUSTRY ANALYSIS  
 
SPARK PLUGS 
 
 
Question: 
 
We have a client who is interested in opening a manufacturing plant for spark plugs in Spain.  How would you 
advise them? 
 
 
Approach: 
 
The interviewer begins by pushing for your snapshot of the size of the Spanish spark plug market. Think through all 
the uses for spark plugs in an economy (cars, trucks, diesel engines, lawn- mowers, etc). How many sparkplugs per 
cylinder in an engine? What is the market segmentation of the car market (4-cylinder vs. 8-cylinder cars for 
instance)? How many cars per year are manufactured in Spain (new market each year)? Ignore corporate fleet 
demand and truck market - only look at consumer market. What is the economic life of spark plugs? 
One possible figure. 
Assume: 
Mention other uses of spark plugs but focus on passenger car market for simplicity. 
Population of 36 million. 
Assume number of new cars bought each yr. per family 
Assume economic life of new cars 
Number of spark plug changes over economic life, etc. 
 
After achieving an annual demand number for spark plugs, analyze the market conditions. Use Five Forces. 
Suppliers/ Buyers strength, barriers to entry, threat of substitutes, firm rivalry conditions.  Probe interviewer for raw 
materials needed for spark plugs. Is Spain well situated because of market isolation? Low wages? Proximity to 
supporting industries, manufacturing consumers, etc. What are the different cost components to spark plugs (raw 
materials, labor content, transportation, margin, etc)? What are technology needs in the manufacturing process?  
Understand order-winning criteria for auto manufacturing contracts. The firm wants to capture how the candidate 
will attack, frame and dissect a very complicated process in both a country and with a product that they are 
unfamiliar. 
 
Note: This case incorporates a tour de force of Porter’s Five Forces analysis, a country Diamond overview, your 
ability to conduct "guesstimations "in foreign markets and a basic understanding of supply chain interaction. 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 71 
 
