===== PDF p98 =====
Human Capital 
Deloitte 
Round 1 
Case 18: KGF’s Learning Management 
Prompt 
Your client is faced with dramatic changes in the industry.  As your client adjusts their strategy and 
reacts to changes while anticipating future changes, they are concerned about their ability to keep 
their employees prepared for the challenges they will face. The client is also concerned about their 
traditional approach to learning and development and has questions about the return on investment 
of their current programs. 
 
Your team was retained to help assess the effectiveness of the organizations learning center, 
develop a go forward learning strategy, and to select and implement an ―appropriate‖ enterprise 
learning management system (LMS) solution that will allow the client‘s learning center to 
successfully execute its learning strategy while simplifying its operational processes and allowing it 
to scale for future growth. 
 
Please consider the following questions: What approach would you take to assessing the client‘s 
current learning capabilities and developing the go forward strategy? What issues would you 
consider regarding the selection and implementation of the Learning Management System? 
 
Note about nature of the Case: This is a Human Capital Case and thus contains an approach much 
different from the usual ―Strategy‖ case. However the candidate should not abandon the use of a 
framework. Here the focus isn‘t so much on the bottom line as it is on the approach needed to 
manage the proposed changes in the organization. The case should be carried out in a 
conversational format with hints and clues to push the candidate alongside the case prompt. 
 
Guidance 
Make sure that the candidate understands that you are looking for a qualitative analysis and not a 
quantitative analysis. 
 
Look for a good framework that is logical and sound. 
94 


===== PDF p99 =====
95 
Analysis 
Review current learning activities - balance of instructor-led training, e-Learning, and 
other learning methods 
 Degree of learning assessment used (Reaction, Learning, Transfer, Results) 
 Meet with leadership to determine requirements of new strategy 
 Review individual learning plans 
 Skill gap analysis 
 Assess ability of existing programs to address needs, identify needs for additional 
learning programs 
 Specific system selection and implementation components candidate may consider: 
 Integration with HRIS system 
 Data migration, system configuration, and interface development 
 Self-service registration 
 Degree of network vs. remote access 
 Scalability 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Expected:  The candidate will touch on most of the major points listed in the analysis section, such 
as skill gap analysis, assess current program‘s ability to address needs, integration with HRIS 
system, scalability. 
 
Good:  A good candidate will complete all of the above, as well as bring in a few creative concerns 
and solutions.  For example, the candidate could express concern with employee compliance with 
the new system or talk about the benefits of the new system and the impact it will have on 
complexity within the organization. 
 
Excellent:  An excellent candidate will address all of the major points listed in the analysis section 
while also bringing in creative insight. 
 
 
Human Capital 
Deloitte 
Round 1 
Case 18: KGF’s Learning Management 
