===== PDF p116 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
112 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Game Show and Creativity Cases 
 
 
Picture a small town with a population of 10,000 people in rural Austria.  A river divides the 
town.  There is only one bridge with two lanes over this river and this is the only crossing point 
for several hundreds of kilometers.  A factory stands on one side of the river and the entire 
population lives on the other side of the river. 
 
The mayor of the village approaches you and tells you that the bridge presents a bottleneck to the 
village during rush hour when people are going to work (i.e. there are severe traffic jams).  He 
wants you to solve the problem without spending a lot of money. 
 
(The first thing I did was to draw a picture of the village.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Just to make sure I understand this correctly, all villagers live on the right-hand side of the river, 
only the factory stands on the left-hand side of the river and only the villagers from the right-
hand side work in this factory. 
 
!"Correct. 
 
Is it possible to build another bridge? 
 
!"No.  We want to keep this as cheap as possible. 
 
Well, let’s start out by identifying when these traffic jams occur.  What time do the villagers go 
to work? 
 
!"There are two shifts; the first begins at 8am and the second starts at 9am.  Each worker 
works 8 hours.  Then they go home. 
 
Okay.  That implies that the traffic jams occur roughly between 7-9am, and 4-6pm.   Do all men 
and women work at the factory? 
 
!"No.  Only the men. 
 
 


===== PDF p117 =====
Game show Cases 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
113 
Assuming 20% of the population is children, we are left with 8,000 adults.  Assuming that the 
gender split in a typical Austrian village is 45% men - 55% women, we are left with 3,600 men 
that commute over the bridge.  Does anyone besides the men have a reason to cross the bridge? 
 
!"No. 
 
This means that, given a constant travel rate amongst all the men, roughly 1,800 men pass over 
the bridge in one hour (3,600 men / 2 hours).  This translates into 30 men per minute (1,800 men 
/ 60 minutes) and if each drives one car, 30 cars per minute. 
 
!"Okay.  So now that you know when and why the traffic jams occur, what suggestions do 
you have to solve this dilemma?  And please be as creative as possible. 
 
(I could tell that I was on the right track.  This guy was mainly looking for how creative I could 
be.)  Well, given that most men travel over and back at approximately the same time, the mayor 
could give incentives to those men that car-pooled.  The city could build car-pooling meeting 
points.  This would eliminate a lot of traffic on the bridge.  For example, if 3 men car-pooled 
every day, only 600 cars as opposed to 1,800 would pass over the bridge per hour (10 cars versus 
30 per minute). 
 
!"Good. 
 
A second suggestion would be to open both lanes to traffic.  Between 7-9am, all traffic traveling 
west to the factory would be allowed to use both lanes.  The opposite would apply to the 
afternoon rush hour period from 4-6pm. 
 
!"Good. 
 
A third suggestion would be to subsidize those commuters that walked, used motor scooters or 
bicycles to get to work. 
 
!"Good. 
 
(I could tell that this guy still wasn’t all too impressed.  I sat there and thought for a moment 
about my personal life and what experiences I had witnessed.  Then it hit me.)  My final 
suggestion resembles something I saw in Santiago de Chile when I lived there.  The city had a 
serious problem with smog and as a result restricted the use of motor vehicles on certain days.  
But instead of restricting everyone’s use, the city gave motorists different colored license plates 
that could only be used on a specific day of the week.  So for example, if your car had a red 
license plate, you could only drive the vehicle on Mondays, Wednesday and Fridays.  If you had 
a green license plate, you could only drive on Tuesdays, Thursday and Saturdays. 
 
!"Excellent!  I have never heard that answer before.  Good job. 
 
 After the last comment, I left the interview with a good feeling.  I was lucky that I realized early 
on that the interviewer was more interested in the creative solutions I could come up with rather 
than just generic ones. 
