===== PDF p62 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
58 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
Our client is a major provider of long-distance telephone service in the United States.  It owns a 
subsidiary that is a communications satellite company – in the business of launching satellites 
and then marketing (selling or leasing) the transponders on the satellite to companies or to phone 
service providers.  The subsidiary has proposed a $400 million expansion involving new 
satellites, and the client would like to know whether this is a good investment or not.  The 
satellite subsidiary has not been making a return on capital up to the parent company’s standards, 
and the client is not even sure if it should be in this business – they may want to sell it.  What do 
you tell them? 
 
Okay, clearly the first question is whether or not to keep the business – before investing $400 
million, you’d want to know if you were going to keep owning the subsidiary.  So the first 
question I’d have would be to find out how profitable the company is and whether its 
profitability can be improved.  This might include making the investment, but it might not. 
 
!"Good.  Let me tell you about their performance last year.  They had $50 million in revenues, 
and $48 million in cost, for a profit before taxes of $2 million.  The parent doesn’t think 
that’s a good return. 
 
Where did the revenues come from? 
 
!"$40 million was from annual leases for 20 of the firm’s 100 transponders; these do not 
include service charges.  $10 million was from annual service charges on the 80 
transponders used by customers outside the parent company, including both the 20 that are 
being leased out and 60 transponders that were sold before the satellite was launched – 
something that satellite companies frequently do to raise capital in the expensive 
development and launch phases of the business.  20 of the company’s 100 transponders are 
used by the parent company (the client) for their phone service, and the subsidiary receives 
no revenue for that. 
 
Okay, well the first thing that comes to mind is that the subsidiary’s revenues should include the 
value of the services provided for free to the parent company – because the parent will have to 
pay for them if the subsidiary is sold.  So, the parent uses 20 transponders, which apparently have 
an annual value from leasing of $40 million.  Then there’s also the service charge on each 
transponder, which is $10 million/80.  So that’s a total value of $45 million in annual revenues 
that the subsidiary is providing the parent.  So, in fact, the subsidiary’s revenues should be more 
like $95 million.  What about the subsidiary’s costs? 
 
(Note: I made a math error here, and didn’t notice it until later.  The service charge on each 
transponder is $125,000, and for 20 transponders it should have been $2.5 million, not the $5 
million I said). 
 
!"The costs include $28 million for tracking and otherwise operating the satellite, and $20 
million that the parent company is charging the subsidiary each year for 5 years to cover the 
cost of a satellite that was destroyed upon launch a few years ago. 
 
What?  Wasn’t it insured? 


===== PDF p63 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
59 
 
!"Satellites are a very risky business – 1 in 7 of all new satellites fail when launched – and thus 
satellites are frequently insured for far less than their value because insurance is very 
expensive.  In fact, there is a 10% chance of failure over five years for every satellite in 
operation. 
 
Wow.  Okay, but the loss the subsidiary suffered when the satellite failed was a one-time loss 
that should not affect current income – it’s a sunk cost, and should have been taken as a one-time 
charge rather than a recurring expense.  It shouldn’t even be considered when judging the 
subsidiary’s profitability.  Therefore, the subsidiary had revenues of $95 million on costs of $28 
million – that’s a very profitable subsidiary, and they should definitely keep it! 
 
!"Good.  That’s exactly right.  Let’s jump ahead.  Say we tell the client this, and our further 
analysis says that the $400 million investment will be as profitable as the subsidiary claims 
it will be.  But the client still doesn’t think they should be in this business, and that they think 
they want to sell.  What factors should we consider? 
 
The first thing is that they’d be losing a lot of future revenue, even though they could get much 
of it in a sale of the subsidiary.  However, there are other considerations.  For example, the 
parent uses those 20 transponders – would they be able to get the same service if the subsidiary 
were separate?  Do they need to keep the ability to expand their own satellite use if there are too 
few satellites to keep up with demand?  Would they be able to get as good a price? 
 
!"Well, assume that the satellite market is fairly commodified, and that they don’t need to own 
a satellite company to protect their usage – they could get transponder leases for the same 
price from any number of providers with the same quality of service, and there’s no shortage 
expected at all. 
 
Okay, then there’s the question of whether it’s a good idea to take the risk that a competitor 
might buy the firm.  If the future of telecommunications is moving more towards cellular and 
satellite-type communications, then maybe they want to keep the subsidiary in case technology 
makes it important to own one in the future, or to deny that capability to the competition. 
 
!"Fine.  So you tell them all this, and it makes sense.  But what if they still say that they want to 
sell the subsidiary.  What could be promoting that? 
 
Hmm.  Maybe they need capital for their core business, for the long-distance business, and they 
don’t want to go to the markets.  Maybe they just want to pare down the business to focus on 
their core competency, and they think that both companies can do better as separate entities 
rather than joined – like AT&T spun off Lucent. 
 
!"Anything else. 
 
Can’t think of anything. 
 
!"That’s good.  The reason they still wanted to sell it despite its profitability was really that the 
long-distance business is a fairly steady business – the returns are small but low-risk.  


===== PDF p64 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
60 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Satellites are very risky, and the parent company felt that their shareholders were too risk-
averse to be comfortable with it.  Essentially, they saw that they had a different risk/return 
profile from their subsidiary, and decided that the two weren’t a good match. 
 
(Leaving this interview, I realized how dumb I had been to miss the implications of the high-risk 
data that he had given me when discussing the subsidiary’s finances.  The lesson is not to 
discount anything the interviewer mentions – I latched onto the services the subsidiary provided 
to the parent, which was good, but did so to the exclusion of the more important risk factor.  In 
fact, I realized that he had given me enough information to calculate the cost of the risk.  This 
only compounded the fact that I had gotten the math wrong earlier.  What it proves, though, is 
that some errors are okay, and that it’s tough to judge how interviews go – it turns out that this 
interviewer recommended that I be hired!) 
