===== PDF p217 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
213 
 
57. UK Banking (McKinsey R2, Fin Services, Profitability, Balanced) 
Part 1: brainstorming 
 
Interviewer: We are consulting for a UK consumer bank in 2010. The client offers products including 
credit cards, debit cards, insurance, mutual funds, checking accounts, and mortgages. Its mutual fund 
business, called Mutual Co., has experienced a decline in profitability over the past 5 years. It sells to new 
accounts through both its direct channel of in-house tele-sales representatives and indirectly cross-selling 
its mutual fund products through its insurance business. Mutual Co. earns revenue by charging an annual 
fixed percentage management fee times each account balance. Mutual Co.’s new CEO has hired 
McKinsey to identify why profitability has declined within the unit and to recommend specific actions to 
improve it. 
 
Candidate: Let’s identify what is causing the decline in profitability and then figure out what actions can 
be taken to reverse the trend. 
 
Note: Candidate should generate a MECE structure, such as internal/external or revenue/cost. If 
candidate does not have a MECE structure, press the candidate. When the candidate is done ask for a 
few more drivers! 
 
Example MECE structure: 
 
1) Revenue might be falling; this could be caused by a decline in assets managed or a reduction of 
the fee % charged per asset. A decline in assets could be caused by a reduction in the number of 
accounts or in the average balance per account. 
 
2) Alternatively, costs could be increasing. Fixed costs that could be increasing could be compliance 
costs caused by recent financial reform legislation including Dodd-Frank, or by general SG&A 
increases. Variable costs could be increasing due to increase exchange fees/transaction, 
paperwork costs/transaction, or customer service costs (which in turn could be caused by an 
increase in the time spent per customer service call or the number of customer service calls). 
Note: Only provide the following pieces of information in response to questions from the candidate: 
 
- 
Variable costs have not increased 
- 
Fixed costs have not increased 
- 
The number of accounts hasn’t decreased 
- 
Competitors have experienced a similar decline in profitability 
Note: The candidate should identify that the only remaining factor is that the average balance per account 
must have decreased. If after several minutes of brainstorming the candidate does not identify this is the 
cause, guide him to this cause (or state it explicitly) and move on to the next section. 
 
Part 2: account balance 
 
Interviewer: Over the past five years, the average account balance has decreased. Why do think that 
might be? 
 
Candidate: One cause might be the financial crisis. On average, US equity prices are lower than they 
were in 2007… it’s probably the same in the UK. 
 
Interviewer: Yes, the client believes that is the primary cause and would like to know what the average 
account balance would need to be to have a 10% profit margin. 
 
Note: Only provide the following pieces of information in response to questions from the candidate: 
 
- 
Management Fees are 0.5% of the account balance 


===== PDF p218 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
214 
 
- 
There are 1,000,000 accounts 
- 
The average account balance is currently $5,000 
- 
The costs of managing each account are $20 (these are the variable costs) 
- 
All other costs are $35M in total (these are the fixed costs) 
Candidate: First, I will calculate the costs per account. Then, I will multiply by 1.11 to calculate the 
revenue necessary to achieve a 10% profit margin. Finally, I will divide that by the management fee 
percentage to find the average account balance necessary to achieve that profit margin. 
 
Interviewer: That seems like a logical approach. 
 
Candidate: Fixed costs are $35M, supporting 1M accounts. Thus, each account has on average $35 of 
fixed costs. Since variable costs are $20/account, total costs per account are $55. To achieve a profit 
margin of 10%, there would therefore need to be an average of just over $61/account of management 
fees. Since management fees are 0.5% of the account balance, that means the minimum average 
account balance needs to be $61/0.005 = $12,200. 
 
Part 3: profitability 
 
Interviewer: Great job! Next, the client would like us to help them think of specific actions they can take 
to increase profitability. Have any ideas? 
 
Note: Candidate should generate a MECE structure, revenue/cost. If Candidate does not have a MECE 
structure, press the candidate. When the Candidate is done ask for a few more ideas! Example ideas 
include: Revenue: review/improve the incentives that the parent company’s indirect sales force have to 
sell Mutual Co.’s products, have a new promotion, see whether the management fee percentage is below 
industry average and can be safely raised depending on demand elasticity, and expanding 
geographically. Variable Costs: ensuring the client is using electronic communications rather than paper 
costs ($20/account seems like a lot of variable cost!) and using 3rd party mutual funds rather than those 
managed in house (may be cheaper). Fixed Costs: consolidate support functions (HR, IT, Finance) with 
the parent company, consolidate locations to save on rent expenses. 
 
Interviewer: Wonderful. So, tell me about an achievement you are particularly proud of? 
