===== PDF p72 =====
Establishing the case
Case6 :  Hospital Administrative Software
Booz & Company:  Round 1
•Our client sells software that runs on hospital operating 
systems across the nation.  The software is used for 
administrative tasks, such as back-office operations and 
clinical record-keeping.  
•The company used to be a market leader, but its share has 
steadily been declining.  Specifically, sales have dropped.
•Our client has engaged our consulting firm to find out why 
sales have dropped and to provide recommendations that 
will address this issue.  
Before diving into the case, ask the candidate to  size the 
market.  Information to be given upon request:
•Replacement rate is every 10 years
•A software sale is worth $9M each, but because it takes 3 
years to install, the company receives the money in three 
installments of $3M each year.  
•Only one software product is needed for each hospital.
Problem Statement Narrative
After sizing the market, candidate should find out why sales 
have been declining. Information to be given upon request:  
•The market is growing at 15%
•Competition can install their products within 2 years.
•The sales force says that the product is hard to sell to 
hospitals.  Installments can be delayed and can take 
sometimes up to 4 years to complete installation.
•When installations are delayed, software “patches” have to 
be developed in order to make the software function 
properly in the meantime.  This can be costly in terms of 
programming and training costs.     
•Customers prefers simple products that are easy to use and 
navigate
•Customers feel that the client‟s product has more features 
than needed.  Makes it complex and lengthens installation 
time. 
•R&D unit often adds features to the product without any 
market research first.  
Guidance For Interviewer
68


===== PDF p73 =====
Sample solution element – Math
Sizing the Market (sample solution): We have one hospital that serves the 50,000 people within in my community.  
We can use this as a rule of thumb.  If there‟s 300M people in the US, then there‟s 6,000 hospitals in the nation 
(300M /50,000).  Every 10 years, a hospital will replace its software, so demand is 600 new software per year 
(6,000 hospitals/10 years).  600 software units demanded x 9M = $5.4B in revenue per year    
Math Question
After sizing the market, the candidate should find out why 
sales have been declining.  
Start by looking at the external environment.  This should 
include asking about the growth rate of the market, about 
any changes in the industry landscape, new legislation or 
technology,  the products of competitors, and customer 
preferences.
Afterwards, look internally.  Find out whether the client‟s 
product is meeting customer standards. Ask about the 
price– how does it compare to competitor‟s products?  Find 
out about the client‟s capabilities, such as research and 
development and its sales force– are they being 
compensated fairly? Sales and marketing are ultimately 
responsible for top-line growth, so that‟s an area to touch 
on.       
Overall Approach
I would recommend that our client simplify its product 
features in order to make it easier to use for our client‟s 
customers.  This will also reduce the time it takes to 
implement the software, bring down the costs associated 
with delayed implementation, and put our client on par with 
its competitors in terms of implementation time.  
Additionally, I would look into creating control policies 
within the research and development department in order 
to provide structure to adding new product features.  Doing 
so will help reduce unnecessary research and development 
costs.  
Recommendation
69
