===== PDF p36 =====
CASE 16:  PHARMACEUTICALS (BCG – Round 2)          
 
Two large branded pharmaceutical companies are merging.  The head of development (pre-
clinical and clinical) has a declining budget and wants to re-think his portfolio.  He currently 
uses a spreadsheet to evaluate his portfolio which contains columns for the chemical name, 
estimated launch date, and lead indication.  Essentially, your client wants you to add a column 
for the current market value of the partially developed drug so that he can evaluate which ones 
to push through development.  How do you do it? 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• There are 60 drugs in development with 1/3 in clinical trials 2/3 in pre-clinical development.   
• It takes 10 years to bring a drug from pre-clinical to launch and there is large attrition along the 
way.   
• Assume that this is a U.S. launch only, that there is no bundling, and that each compound 
represents a novel therapy. 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
31
 
Q:  To determine the market value of the drug, I would want to do an NPV calculation and so the two 
areas I would primarily like to explore is revenue and costs.  I’d like to begin with the revenue side of 
the equation first and begin discussing the factors that influence volume.  Should I begin with a 
particular drug or should we talk in generalities? 
A:  I’d like to focus on the thought process you would use to do the calculation and so I am not 
concerned about a specific drug.  Generalities are fine. 
 
Q:  Ok.  The first thing I would want to do is estimate the size of the market and consequently our 
market share at the time of launch.  To do that I’d like to know the # of people who suffer from a 
particular ailment. 
A:  Where would you find that? 
 
Q:  You can go to all kinds of different sources like the American Cancer Society or the American 
Lung Association who keep track of this information.  In particular, I’d take the growth rate for a 
given disease category over the past few years and use that to extrapolate what it would be when the 
drug launches to get the total number of people with the illness.  Next, I’d want to find out the number 
of people who are generally treated for the disease. 
A:  And where would you find that information? 
 
Q:  Similar sources although I suspect I’d might also be able to look at analyst reports depending on 
the type of therapy being evaluated. 
A:  Good 
 
Q:  Next, I want to discount that number by the number of people who seek treatment using a drug vs. 
another procedure like surgery to get a true sense of the market.  Then I would want to take into 
account the competitive environment. 
A:  What in particular would you look for? 
 
Q:  Well, I would first want to understand what competitors are on the market now and where we 
anticipate them being from a product lifecycle perspective when we expect to launch our therapy.  In 
particular, I’d want to drill down on comparisons between mechanism of action, indications, and 
dosing requirements. 
A:  What else should you look for? 


===== PDF p37 =====
 
32
Interviewee’s Solution (cont.): 
 
Q:  Knowing that new drugs are always being developed, I’d want to evaluate those that are currently 
in the pipeline of our competitors and what we anticipate the impact of them being on the market at 
the time of launch.  You can find this information in publications like R&D directions as well as other 
trade publications. 
A:  Sounds good.  Besides volume what else should you be thinking about? 
 
Q:  Pricing.  Pricing for drugs has a lot to do with demonstrated efficacy as well as whether you are the 
first drug in a given class to be launched.  Other things that you might want to consider include 
convenience (dosing requirements) and other drugs used to treat the therapy even if the mechanism of 
action differs. 
A:  Great.  What about costs? 
 
Q:  From a cost perspective, I’d want to consider both fixed and variable costs.  This would include 
any new facilities that need to be built to manufacture the drug as well as the R&D and sales and 
marketing launch costs associated with the product. 
A:  And what would you do with this information? 
 
Q:  I’d determine the free cash flow number for each year and then discount that back to the current 
period.  Additionally, since the process has high attrition, I’d also want to adjust for the probability of 
success at each phase. 
A:  Great.  Let’s say you’ve done all this and it turns out that ½ the compounds in pre-clinical 
development have no value.  How are you going to plug the hole from a revenue perspective? 
 
Q:  Any time you are considering product development there are two options – make or buy.  Under 
the make category, we could try to expedite the development of existing pipeline drugs to address the 
gap but this is fairly unlikely to prove successful given the highly complex development process. 
A:  What else could address the revenue considerations if you can’t expedite development? 
 
Q:  You could work with your existing portfolio of marketed products to increase the amount of 
revenue you can get from them.  This could include considering shifting them to over the counter 
products or evaluating other indications for the drug.  However, I suspect we may already be doing 
this so it is unlikely to be all of the answer. 
A:  Good.  What else? 
 
Q:  We can buy a product or a group of products to plug the hole.  To do so, we should go through a 
similar compound valuation exercise as we did for our portfolio but also take into account synergies 
between our two organizations and the previous track record of the other company in launching 
similar projects. 
A:  Sound good.  Thanks. 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
This case is an interesting spin on the standard market sizing type of question – Rather than evaluate 
one market, the candidate has to outline a general process for sizing the market for a number of 
different drugs. Layered on top of this the candidate needs to demonstrate a good understand of the 
process for deriving an NPV and the relationship between the NPV and the original market sizing 
exercise.  
 
The candidate has given a very good answer and there are a number of positive aspects worth noting, 
including the following: 


===== PDF p38 =====
• Before doing anything else, the candidate sets out a clear road map for tackling the question – 
“I am going to do an NPV which will mean looking at revenues and costs” 
• The candidate clarifies the expectations of the interviewer – “Should we be looking at 
generalities or specifics?” The last thing you want to be doing in a case interview is giving a 
great answer that bores the interviewer because it is not the aspect of the question that they 
were interested in. 
• The candidate has a clear and logical approach to sizing the market for each drug. Not only are 
the steps sensible and meaningful but they are also readily verifiable by available data (such as 
American Cancer Society data on the number of patients with a particular cancer condition). It 
is quite common for interviewers to ask how you would go about getting the data to support a 
certain step in you logic so it is important to be choosing divisions where this information is 
likely to be available. 
• The candidate does not get bogged down when the interviewer changes the question. If you are 
asked a new question, like how to fill a hole in the pipeline, then develop a new framework for 
approaching this aspect – “there are two options to consider, make or buy” 
 
Similar techniques could be applied to almost any market sizing question. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33
