===== PDF p24 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
20  
5.1. 
Private Equity Portfolio Strategy 
Source: A.T. Kearney 2006 
Length: Medium (30 Minutes) 
 
Problem: 
Our client is a private equity firm which operates primarily in the automotive industry. 
They want us to investigate whether they should increase their portfolio in the sensor 
market? Also what criteria should be used by the client to identify target companies?  
 
Information To Be Provided: 
• Market potential :  
• Electronics content in automotives will keep growing and is expected to represent 
17% of total purchased materials in an average vehicle by 2006.  
• Sensors will become a more and more important part of the automotive 
electronics content — according to a previous study conducted by us, we estimate 
they will represent approximately $150 on average per vehicle by the year 2005 
• Global growth potential beyond automotive e.g., aerospace, semiconductors, 
medical devices and consumer electronics. Automotive and Aerospace being the 
biggest growth areas 
• NPV analysis: To operate a company in sensor market requires an recurring 
investment of $10M, $11M and 12M resp. starting in year 0,1, 2. Our client has 
done back of the envelope cash flow analysis that show that they can expect a 
cash flow of $12M after the first year growing at a rate of 5%. Assume a three 
year outlook is sufficient to make a decision if the client should go ahead with the 
investment. Using this data, determine if the client should go ahead with the idea 
of investing in the sensor market. Assume cost of capital=10% 
 
• Key demand drivers: Increasing consumer demand; government regulation for 
safety, environmental, and comfort in automotive. 
 
• Customer buying criteria: The OEMs are the customers of sensor manufacturers 
and they place a high value on leading-edge technology as electronic systems are seen 
as a source of differentiation. 
 
• Competition: The sensor market is extremely fragmented — leading sensor 
companies are aggressively using acquisitions and partnerships to grow by expanding 
their product, industry, geographic footprints and/or acquire promising technologies.  
 
• Cost Structure: Being in the sensor business requires significant continuing 
investments in terms of infrastructure and technology. However it is high margin 
business and is likely to remain so for the next 4-5 years. 
 
Solution: 
The data provided in this case clearly presents a very positive picture of the sensor 
market. The real answer lies in articulating and structuring the decision criteria for an 
acquisition target for our client. The interviewee should be able to quickly highlight 2 


===== PDF p25 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
21  
success factors for sensor companies i.e. Profit growth potential of a company and the fit 
with existing portfolio 
 
Profit/Margin Growth Potential:  
• What market segments is the company playing in? What is the growth potential of 
these market segments?   
• What geographies and product and services are being addressed by the company 
and the future growth potential of each?  
• Does the company have strong existing customer relationships? 
• Technology Leadership: What is the technology focus of the company? What are 
the R&D investments? How many patents are owned by the company? Etc. 
• Present Value estimation using the due diligence done by the client on a 
representative company in the sensor market revealed a positive return at the end 
of three years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 
0
1
2
3
PV 
Investment($M) 
10
11
12
0
29.92
Cash flow ($M) 
  
12
12.6
13.23
31.26
Net($M) 
  
  
  
  
1.34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Fit with portfolio: To what extent can we add 
value to this company given the companies in 
our portfolio 
 
A better answer will also highlight the advantages and disadvantages of  moving into this 
market to the client in terms of the following: 
 
Advantages: 
• Access new technologies that can be potentially used by other portfolio 
companies 
• Expand beyond automotive industry to garner higher buy-out multiples  upon exit 
• Diversification of existing portfolio (currently only in automotive) 
• Potential to establish industry leadership since the market is fragmented currently 
• Enlarging size of entities dealing with OEM customers 
 
Disadvantages:  
• Likely expensive acquisition 
• Likely significant investment required to stay competitive (continuing R&D to 
invent latest sensor technologies for differentiation with competitors) 
• Learning curve on managing sensor business 
• Higher risks (i.e., relatively long lead time from R&D to market) 
 
Assumptions 
  
Growth rate= 
5%
Cost of capital= 
10%
