===== PDF p39 =====
Case 8: S SOFTWARE 
BCG, 2nd Round 
 
The Problem 
 
An US software company wants to offshore its engineering/designing unit to India, as 
well as to penetrate into the India software engineering market.  Should they do it? 
 
Information Gathering 
 
Read this information well before you give the case.  The candidate is supposed to figure 
our following information by asking appropriate questions.  The interview style is 
pleasant but reserved. 
 
Since it’s a two-fold question, a strong candidate will begin with laying out a clear scope 
and then gather relevant information to analyze the situation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Definitely offshore 
Offshore but also find 
out other critical factors 
to enter the India 
market   
Evaluate the India market 
independently with 
market, customer, 
competition, etc. 
Stay in current market 
and strengthen 
competitiveness 
 
Market Share – the company is the industry leader in US with close followers chasing 
behind. 
 
Profitability – declining (unknown reason, but increasing labor costs can be a reasonable 
assumption). 
 
Capability – strong engineering department in the US.   
 
Cost – R&D is the major cost and Indian engineers are estimated to be 1/4 of the cost of 
the US engineers with the same technical capability. 
 
Customer –  
• Has a strong existing customer base in the US. 
• Customers care about the quality of service, but are also considering lowering 
cost in the long run. 
 
A strong candidate should follow up with questions about customer segmentation. 
Off-shoring is critical to access local market 
Other benefits 
of off-shoring 
Significant 
Minor 
No 
Yes 


===== PDF p40 =====
• Most of S Software’s clients are medium to large companies in US. 
• The most profitable clients are large companies in developed countries where S 
Software already has a strong base. 
• S Software doesn’t have any international presence yet. 
 
Competition – US 
• Key US competitors are all off-shoring in order to lower the cost. 
 
Competition – International 
• The growth of the international market is impressive compared to the more 
mature and stable US market. 
• Key competitors are expanding their international business aggressively. 
• India is one of the fastest growing international markets as well as the one with 
the largest market size. 
 
A strong candidate will get the hint that entering the international market, especially the 
India market, is critical for the company to both fulfill current customer’s emerging 
needs of cost saving and grow its future business.  He/she should then start to compare 
the competitive advantages between large US companies off-shoring and local Indian 
players. 
 
 
US companies 
Indian players 
Ability to fulfill customized needs 
O 
 
High quality services 
O 
 
Access to most profitable clients 
O 
 
Cost advantage 
 
O 
Local market knowledge 
 
O 
Local client / government / supply 
chain relationships 
 
O 
Low legal risks 
O 
O 
 
Conclusion 
 
The short answer is “Yes”.  The situation falls into the upper left corner of the matrix 
because –  
 
• In the long-run, even current customers with established relationship will need to 
look for cheaper alternatives.  S Software can offshore its R&D to lower the cost 
but still keeps its customer service team in the US to maintain the high service 
quality. 
 
• Although clients in the developed country are more profitable, the actual growth 
of the market is limited.  Developing markets like India might not be as profitable 
as the US, but with the huge and growing market size, even capturing a small 
percentage of the market can provide substantial profits. 
 


===== PDF p41 =====
• S Software might lack knowledge of the Indian market, but its strong customer 
relationship management skills, large existing customer bass, and the understating 
of unique customer needs can be further leveraged in India.  In addition, hiring 
local talent or partnering with local companies can help solve the concern of the 
lack of local knowledge.  
 
• The legal risk as well as the political risk in India can be considered low. 
 
 
