===== PDF p72 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
68 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Your client is an American party-plan selling company, which sells power tools through hosted 
parties. Tupperware is the classic example of this type of selling. The company has a small core 
of full-time corporate marketing staff that recruits consultants, who are independent contractors. 
The consultants recruit hosts, who hold the parties. The hosts invite purchasers to their parties to 
buy the power tools. The hosts are compensated with a free gift and discounts on their purchases. 
The consultants get a percentage of their hosts’ sales. In addition, the consultants can recruit up 
to four layers of other consultants and get a portion of their revenues. The company started eight 
years ago and has had explosive revenue growth. Recently the rate of growth has started to slow. 
(See graph below for their revenues.) The client has asked you two questions: what is the factor 
slowing growth, and how can they improve the situation? 
 
I would examine the four levels of selling to see where the problem is: purchasers, hosts, 
consultants, and central marketing. Let’s start with purchasers. For them I would ask whether the 
average frequency and size of purchase has changed. 
 
!"Good. The purchaser behavior has not changed—on average they buy as much and as 
frequently as before.  
 
Okay—then it seems like the problem is that we aren’t recruiting enough new purchasers. Let’s 
look at the levels of purchaser recruitment. Are the hosts’ behavior changed? Are they having as 
many parties with as many people as before?  
 
!"Yes—nothing has changed there.  
 
How about the consultants? Are they recruiting as many hosts as before? 
 
!"Yes—nothing has changed there.  
 
Okay—are the consultants recruiting as many other consultants as before?  
 
!"No—the number of consultants being recruited has dropped, both with corporate 
marketing and via other consultants. Why do you think this might be?  
 
I could be because the consultants don’t have much incentive to recruit other consultants beyond 
the first 2 layers. If each consultant gets 10% of the sales of the consultant’s they recruit, then by 
the fourth layer, $1 in Consultant D’s sales turns into $0.10 for C, a penny for B and a tenth of a 
penny of A—so A doesn’t care if D does well or even exists. Perhaps we need to increase 
incentives for the consultants by giving them more of a stake in increasing sales. 
 
!"Okay—but the incentive arrangement hasn’t changed—during the history of explosive 
growth we had the same incentives in place. Why aren’t they working any more? 
 
Hmm. (I’m stumped.) Well the key is to get new people—maybe the group of consultants that we 
have has just run out of new friends to recruit? 
 


===== PDF p73 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
69 
!"Yes—it turns out that they have basically used up all the raw material in their area. 
Almost everyone who is interested in doing a power-tool party recruiting have already 
participated. So now, what would you recommend? 
 
Well, they should try and spawn out into new populations. Maybe they should look at the map of 
their consultants and see if there are areas in the US that they haven’t covered. Then if it looks 
like New Mexico, for instance, isn’t well covered, they should either direct corporate marketing 
efforts in that area, and/or give extra incentives to consultants who recruit other consultants in 
the target area. You could look internationally. 
 
!"What would you look for in international expansion?  
 
Well, I would look to see areas where DIY (do-it-yourself) was flourishing. For instance, I know 
that the UK has a very big, high-growth DIY market, and because of the common language, the 
UK is often less of a hassle to move into that other countries.  
 
!"Yes. Let me tell you what happened with this company. It turned out that party-plan sales 
companies usually are based on fads, and so they grow and then burn out. The top-level 
employees then move onto another party-plan company selling another product. We 
proposed international expansion, and researched a few countries. It turns out that 
party-plan selling is illegal in China, but very common and accepted in Latin America.  
 
In retrospect I think that the compensation for the four levels of consultants was a red herring, 
and I fell for it. I should have been concentrating on things that had changed since their sales 
started leveling off.  
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
 
