===== PDF p108 =====
Deloitte 
Round 1 
Human Capital 
Case 22: F2D Electronics 
Prompt 
Problem Definition: Your client is the nation‘s largest distributor of electrical and communications 
products. The 150-year old company distributes more than one and a half-million products (1.5 
million SKUs) made by multiple manufacturer/suppliers through 256 branches and warehouses in 
the US. Given that they are the middle-men, margins in the distribution industry are very thin.  F2D 
has been generally decentralized with a high degree of branch autonomy (branch and district 
managers are kings of their own domain). Each branch has its own processes with considerable off-
system accounting and record keeping on Excel spreadsheets, etc. Given growth over the last 
decade, the home-grown mainframe computer system can no longer effectively handle the volume 
of transactions. In addition, the time required to reconcile and report sales, inventory, and financial 
information from the branches to corporate is hindering senior management‘s ability to make timely 
business decisions. To address these issues, the client is undertaking a major business 
transformation program. They will reengineer most business processes (sales, marketing, 
forecasting, logistics, finance, customer service) and are implementing one system for everyone in 
the company that will provide real-time information and a 360 degree view of the business. Senior 
management anticipates a high degree of resistance from the branches. Branch leadership feels the 
system and processes from corporate will not understand their needs and threatens their autonomy. 
Past initiatives have struggled because people were not adequately prepared for the changes. 
Employees are worried about how their jobs will change and whether they will have the skills to do 
their jobs within the new system. 
Question: How would you assist the client to successfully manage this large scale change 
program? 
 
Note about nature of the Case: This is a Human Capital Case and thus contains an approach much 
different from the usual ―Strategy‖ case. However the candidate should not abandon the use of a 
framework. Here the focus isn‘t so much on the bottom line as it is on the approach needed to 
manage the proposed changes in the organization. The case should be carried out in a 
conversational format with hints and clues to push the candidate alongside the case prompt. 
Guidance 
Note: Remember that this case is intended to be carried out in a conversational manner. 
104 


===== PDF p109 =====
105 
Analysis 
  Leadership Alignment and Visibility/Sponsorship: Facilitate leadership at corporate to ―sing from 
the same page.‖ Then, enable corporate leadership to engage district and branch leaders. Clearly 
explain why the changes are required in the competitive business environment, why their leadership 
is needed and how they will be rewarded. In times of large scale changes, there should be a high 
degree of leadership visibility. 
  Buy-In: Employees need to know that their leaders (at corporate and branches) are behind this 
effort and they need to hear this directly from their leaders. Provide talking points and support to 
make it easier for them to communicate to employees. 
  Communications: Develop a comprehensive communication strategy for internal and external 
audiences. Explain to employees the business case for change, ―what is in it for them,‖ and how 
their jobs will change. Communications should be timely and consistent to stem rumors. Similarly, 
there should be a communications strategy for suppliers and customers to explain how service will 
improve to assure them there will be no disruptions. 
  Workforce engagement: Engage employees from as many branches as possible in the design and 
implementation of the new process and system. Gather input on their business requirements 
throughout the lifecycle of the project. Conduct roadshows out to the branches. Use trainers from 
each of the branches to train end users. Engage branches and employees so they take ownership of 
the system. 
  Organizational Reinforcement/Incentives: Make sure those who are providing input, championing 
and adopting the system are recognized, rewarded, and utilized as change agents. 
  Training: Profile how jobs will change and train employees thoroughly on the new process and 
system. Hands-on training close to the launch and relevant to employees‘ jobs tends to be most 
effective. 
Deloitte 
Round 1 
Human Capital 
Case 22: F2D Electronics 


===== PDF p110 =====
106 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Expected: 
The candidate touches upon all the major points recognized in this case. 
 
Good: 
The candidate not only touches upon all the major points but also provides his/her analysis and 
reasoning behind those considerations in a structured way with use of a framework. 
 
Excellent: 
The candidate explains all the scenarios in a well-planned, structured and thoughtful manner 
providing logical reasoning behind his/her statements. The candidate also provides good 
explanation for the question in the prompt and shows in-depth understanding of the leadership, 
alignment and buy-in process as well as Human Capital concepts. 
 
Deloitte 
Round 1 
Human Capital 
Case 22: F2D Electronics 
