===== PDF p94 =====
Human Capital
Deloitte
Round 1
Case 20: Sunique Human Capital
Prompt
Your client is faced with dramatic changes in the industry. As it adjusts its strategy, reacts to
changes and anticipates future changes, it is concerned about its ability to keep its employees
prepared for the challenges they will face. The client is also concerned about its traditional
approach to learning and development and has questions about the return on investment of its
programs.
Your team was retained to help assess the effectiveness of the organizations learning center,
develop  a  go  forward  learning  strategy,  and  to  select  and  implement  an  “appropriate”  enterprise
learning  management  system  (LMS)  solution  that  will  allow  the  client’s  learning  center  to
successfully execute its learning strategy while simplifying its operational processes and allowing it
to scale for future growth.
What  approach  would  you  take  to  assessing  the  client’s  current  learning  capabilities  and
developing the go forward strategy? What issues would you consider regarding the selection and
implementation of the Learning Management System?
Guidance
Make sure that the candidate understands that you are looking at qualitative analysis and not a 
quantitative analysis.
Look for a good framework that is logical and sound.
90


===== PDF p95 =====
91
Analysis
Review current learning activities - balance of instructor-led training, e-Learning, and other learning 
methods
Degree of learning assessment used (Reaction, Learning, Transfer, Results)
Meet with leadership to determine requirements of new strategy
Review individual learning plans
Skill gap analysis
Assess ability of existing programs to address needs, identify needs for additional learning 
programs
Specific system selection and implementation components candidate may consider:
Integration with HRIS system
Data migration, system configuration, and interface development
Self-service registration
Degree of network vs. remote access
Scalability
Performance 
Evaluation
Expected: At a minimum, the candidate should touch on the major points and be comfortable in 
discussing other aspects of the case when gently guided by interviewer.
Good: A good candidate will touch all the major points and require a small amount of guidance to 
cover all aspects of the case.
Excellent: The excellent candidate will touch all the key points with little to no guidance, be 
comfortable and confident in discussing the major points of the case, and develop a framework for 
implementation.
Human Capital
Deloitte
Round 1
Case 20: Sunique Human Capital
