===== PDF p102 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
98 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
A large Healthcare company has decided it is interested in substantially increasing the scale of its 
operations.  Its goal is to double total sales and profits in less than two years.  As a consultant 
brought in to assist them, what would you do? 
 
Additional Information (Needed): 
!"What are the specific objective (quantifiable) advantages to pursuing and achieving this 
goal?   
!"What is the current scope of operations?   
!"In what areas of healthcare does the company do business?  What is the current market 
share in these areas?   
!"What plans has the company already considered / is already considering?   
!"What is the competitive nature of the industry?   
!"What would be the effect on sales and profits of reducing prices/margins?   
!"What potential is there for expansion by acquisition?  Do they have the financial capability? 
Do potential targets exist?  Can they get financing?   
!"What will be the reaction of the competitors to this expansion?   
!"What is their financial condition?   
!"What will be the reaction of the customers?   
!"What are the relevant current and anticipated government regulations? 
 
 
One Approach: 
 
A business can increase its profits (ROI) by increasing sales, increasing prices, or cutting costs.  
If the company’s margins are consistent with the industry norms, it is unlikely that increasing 
prices or cutting costs are likely to provide a means to double sales and profits, particularly if the 
company operates in a moderately competitive environment. 
 
The situation leaves only sales increases.  Sales increases are achieved by: 
• 
Selling more of the current products to current customers 
• 
Selling new products to the current customers 
• 
Selling current products to new customers 
• 
Selling new products to new customers 
 
The suitability of each of these options depends on the particular environment.  In the particular 
example of this case, it turned out that the company could achieve its goals only by selling new 
products to new customers via some form of diversification. 
 
Next, you should consider the potential for increasing sales by means of diversification through 
acquisition or joint venture.  The relative benefits of each will depend on financial resources as 
well as the existence of suitable targets or partners. 
  
 
 
 
 
