===== PDF p102 =====
Human Capital: Outsourcing 
Case 20: Edoceo 
Prompt 
Edoceo is a leading global provider of integrated information solutions to business and professional 
customers. Customers depend on Edoceo for the information and information applications they need 
to make the right decisions to run their businesses. Edoceo provides information solutions for 
professionals across a broad range of industries and disciplines. 
 
Edoceo decided to outsource select HR processes including: Recruiting, Benefits Admin, HRIS, HR 
Admin, L&D, Compensation, Domestic Relocation, Expatriate Admin, Payroll, HR Contact Center.  
Edoceo is working with one of Deloitte‘s competitors to implement the outsourcing transition. The  
initiative‘s objective is to realize cost savings of 10%-20% of total current annual costs over five 
years, while maintaining equivalent levels of service. 
 
In parallel, Edoceo intends to transform the retained HR organization, creating internal Centers of  
Excellence (COE) and developing HR Business Partners to support with outsourced services.  
Edoceo has hired your team to provide best practice guidance and implementation leadership. How 
would you design and implement optimal COEs and HR business partner capability for this  
organization and how would you structure the project? How would you describe a successful 
outcome for this project?  
 
Note about nature of the Case: This is a Human Capital Case and thus contains an approach much 
different from the usual ―Strategy‖ case. However the candidate should not abandon the use of a 
framework. Here the focus isn‘t so much on the bottom line as it is on the approach needed to 
manage the proposed changes in the organization. The case should be carried out in a 
conversational format with hints and clues to push the candidate alongside the case prompt. 
 
Guidance 
 There was a cost reduction effort that the organization was undergoing that required an evaluation 
and shift in HR support. Finance and IT were to follow. 
 Inefficiency and complexity of the existing HR organization were the driving forces of the 
outsourcing. 
Deloitte 
98 


===== PDF p103 =====
99 
Guidance 
The functions intended for COEs are: Benefits, Compensation, Recruiting, Talent Management, HR 
Decision Support, L&D, Org Development, Diversity, and Policy, Compliance and M&A. 
 There is no current assessment of the HRBP role today, and each Market Group runs its own 
entity. The vision for the HRBP is to be: provide business unit specific and consultative services to 
executives and line managers for the people-related issues 
 Impacting their business unit. Business Partners ―broker‖ technical talent from the COEs to deliver 
HR solutions. 
 Considerable job redesign and capability assessment will be conducted for retained positions 
 There is significant concern among staff in retained functions about the long term safety of their 
jobs 
 
Candidate should discuss the business perspective and specifically the role of retained HR in an 
outsourced environment. 
Analysis 
How to structure project: Follow some type of Plan, Build, Run approach, for example:  
Plan & Assess 
As-Is Inventory 
Define staffing strategy COE & Business Partner strategy 
Reporting & metrics strategy 
Stakeholder analysis 
Change readiness assessment 
Communication and change strategy 
Design 
Process design, COE and Business Partner development 
Build communication, change and training materials and implementation plan 
Build & Implement 
Build out process designs and COE structure 
Deliver training materials for the new positions and processes  
Support & Integrate 
Ensure effective interactions with outsourced functions and larger organization 
Human Capital: Outsourcing 
Case 20: Edoceo 
Deloitte 


===== PDF p104 =====
100 
Prompt— 
Part II 
Ask the candidate following question: 
 
What else should Edoceo be considering as it implements the outsourcing and development of the 
COEs? 
Guidance 
Let the candidate deliberate and answer this question. There is not much information to be given to 
the candidate. 
Analysis 
Apart from other considerations the candidate should touch upon these: 
 
How to prevent/deal with: Service disruption, Performance/morale issues, Attrition (loss of key 
talent), Links to other initiatives 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Expected: 
The candidate touches upon all the major points recognized in this case. 
 
Good: 
The candidate not only touches upon all the major points but also provides his/her analysis and 
reasoning behind those considerations in a structured way with use of a framework. 
 
Excellent: 
The candidate explains all the scenarios in a well-planned, structured and thoughtful manner 
providing logical reasoning behind his/her statements. The candidate also provides good 
explanation for the question in Part II and shows in-depth understanding of the change management 
process and human capital concepts. 
 
Human Capital: Outsourcing 
Case 20: Edoceo 
Deloitte 
