===== PDF p55 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 51 - 
Case 12: Post–Merger Integration 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Deloitte, Human Capital  
Round: 2008 Summer, Second 
Content: Qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
An American company and a German Company have recently merged. They need your 
assistance to on the human capital side to make sure that the merger is successful.  
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: Case structure is really important. Make sure they touch on 
all points highlighted below and explain why each point is important.  
 
Project Plan 
 
Leadership Alignment 
 
Organization Re-design 
 
Talent retention 
 
Communication 
 
Culture 
 
Synergies  
 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer:  What are the elements that we should focus on? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, I think we should look at the following: 
 
 
Project Plan 
 
Leadership Alignment 
 
Organization Re-design 
 
Talent retention 
 
Communication 
 
Culture 
 
Synergies  
 
Interviewer:  Great.  Let’s go through each item individually.  What are the elements of a 
project plan? 
 


===== PDF p56 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 52 - 
Interviewee: The project plan would have  
 
 
a list of prioritized business needs,  
 
ideas on how those actions would be completed 
 
set timelines and milestones.  
 
Interviewer : Good.  Now, let’s turn to leadership alignment.  Why is it important to 
align the leadership? 
 
Interviewee:  A successful merger cannot depend on momentum coming just from the 
very top. It has to come from many levels in the organization. To ensure this we need to 
work with the leadership to identify key stake holders. 
 
Interviewer : How would you go about aligning the leadership? 
 
Interviewee: 
– You will have merger teams on either side who are working on the integration this 
should include key influencers and stakeholders 
– Get buy-in from key influencers and stakeholders throughout the organization  
– Include these teams in your plans and incorporate their inputs, get their perspective 
into the project plan. This will give them a sense of ownership. And help in  keeping 
the momentum going leading to a successful integration 
– Be clear to these teams that  
o The merger is going to happen 
o identify what are the ways the merger is going to affect them 
o what are the conflicts they may face  
o what kind of resources do then need  
o what are the critical things that they are working on that might affect the 
merger.  
 
Interviewer:  Good.  Now what about organizational design? 
 
Interviewee:  There is an overall business strategy that’s driving the change in the first 
place.  We need to create an effective organization that matches the broad business 
strategy so that the business objectives can be achieved.  
 
– The main incentive here is to create a new organization or reorganize so that it is 
aligned with the business strategy that is driving the change in the first place 
– Identify the requirements of the new organization and compare it to the inventory of 
existing capabilities 
– Take inputs from all levels to do this 
– Identify the talent base that you have available, their competency and find the top 
performers 
– If there are gaps, if necessary recruit from outside 


===== PDF p57 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 53 - 
 
Interviewer:  Good.  Now, let’s look at the challenges.  Why is talent management 
important? 
 
Interviewee:  There is an insecure environment. Talented people are highly marketable. 
Don’t give them a chance to consider leaving. Convince them that they will be valued in 
the new organization.  
 
Interviewer:  How could we do that? 
 
Interviewee:  Look look at 2 aspects – one is talent retention during the transition and 
other is talent management for the new entity.  
 
Transition 
– When there is change/merger/reorganization, there’s always uncertainty 
– The most talented people are the ones most likely to leave for other, more secure 
places 
– To prevent this you should reach out early to them and make sure that you explain 
the change to them 
– Work with HR to implement retention strategies focused on your top employees. 
 
Post-Merger Talent management 
– Common performance management systems – what metrics to evaluate, how do u 
do annual reviews, is there mid term reviews etc…  
– Harmonize compensation plans, benefit plans, pension plans 
– Create global talent management programs – how do you reward high performers, 
mentoring programs, rotation etc… 
 
Interviewer:  Good.  Now, what can you tell me about communication? 
 
Interviewee:  Communication is key to ensure morale and productivity remain high. 
There are 2 different types of communication: internal and external.  
 
Internal Communication 
– Times of transition create all sorts of rumors through the organization 
– These rumors can worsen the problem of talent retention and cultural clash 
– Best way to tackle this is to communicate early and communicate often 
– Keep communicating the progress of the reorganization, the reason for it, the final 
objective and how the transition is coming along 
– If necessary, repeat the same message over and over even if there is nothing new 
to report 
– And make room for 2-way communication so top leadership is aware of the 
rumors and emotions floating around at the lower levels and can address them 
squarely 


===== PDF p58 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 54 - 
– Remember that any empty communication space will be occupied by rumor and 
speculation, so don’t allow it. 
 
External Communication 
– Present unified face to the external world 
– Keep our business partners, our customers, our suppliers apprised of the 
developments  
– Have press conferences 
– Press releases 
– Interviews 
– Public event sponsorship 
 
Interviewer:  Good.  Now, what can you tell me about the culture? 
 
Interviewee:  Culture is deep rooted and there is no way to change them quickly. Its 
something that happens over time.  
 
a. Culture is the most difficult challenge to manage – it’s usually very deep-rooted 
and intangible, so don’t try to change it overnight 
b. Focus on areas where cultural fit is most important, such as the areas in which the 
two merged entities directly communicate 
c. In these areas, try and build a new culture by creating a new brand or identity for 
the merged entity 
d. Highlight the importance of cultural issues to business value so that you get buy-
in from management. 
 
Interviewer:  Great.  Now what can you tell me about cost synergies? 
 
Interviewee:  There may be cost synergies that we need to look into which may involve 
lay-offs which could be another challenge that the organization will face.  
 
[NOTE The interviewee must not to insist that we need to cut people etc.. this is a human 
capital case and not cost reduction. He must be sensitive to the issue.] 
 
Interviewer:  Good.  What other decisions are there to make? 
 
Interviewee:  I would also think of the following? 
1. Which companies processes to adopt 
2. Build a shared services platform 
3. Enterprise wide HR system 
4. New IT system 
5. Harmonize compensation plans, benefit plans, pension plans 
6. Create global talent management programs 
 
