===== PDF p47 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
43 
 
The client is a regional retail bank. Recently, it has begun facing threats from Internet-based 
financial services firms and other non-traditional firms. Deposits are declining and the bank has 
approached us with a strategy to grow the bottom line. Walk me through some of the issues that 
you consider and work streams you would set up in coming up with some recommendations. 
 
I’d like to structure the analysis along three broad areas, which would also form the work 
streams. I would like to better understand the client’s strengths, particularly their brand equity, 
customer reach and their history. Then I’d like to evaluate competitive trends, products and 
services offered and the value proposition that these competitive firms offer. Finally, I’d like to 
design the capabilities that the client will have to establish in order to grow their bottom line. 
 
!"OK. Where would you like to start? 
 
Could you tell me more about our client, particularly about their customers, brand and history? 
 
!"Sure. The client is a well-established bank based in New England. They have about 3 
million customers and an acquisitions strategy that has been reasonably successful. They 
offer a slew of products including deposits/savings accounts, small investments, credit 
cards and mortgages. However, they have been laggards in eBanking. 
 
Do we know how their customers perceive their brand? 
 
!"Well, they are a reputed and established firm. They are known for trust and security. 
They have chosen to remain a regional bank and consequently customers are quite loyal. 
 
I see. I’m particularly intrigued by the fact that they are laggards in eBanking, which segues 
nicely into the next area I’d like to explore – competition. Can you tell me more about the 
competitive threats they are facing? 
 
!"Competition has intensified both from traditional firms, particularly other regional 
banks and also from new, non-traditional firms. As you’ve probably guessed, Internet-
based firms are able to offer a better perceived value proposition to customers and the 
client feels that there is a strong threat of losing loyal customers. 
 
I think I have a good feel for the client’s competencies as well as the emerging competitive 
threats. Do we know if the client is looking for new product ideas? 
 
!"Well, that would surely be one area to explore. It’s not clear if that is the primary focus 
of the client. How would you help the client identify how to prioritize the various 
options? 
 
I’m sure this is not totally comprehensive, but I’d identify the major product lines the client 
offers customers. For sake of argument, let’s look at three products/services – banking products 
like savings accounts, brokerage services and say, retirement accounts. For each of these 
products/services, I’d then identify the different channels available – branches, the Internet, etc. 
For each of these channels, I’d undertake an analysis of value versus convenience. This would 


===== PDF p48 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
44 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
help segment the various products/services that the client can offer into various levels of service 
quality and value proposition. 
 
!"That’s interesting. What next? 
 
With an approach I just described, I’d like to move to the final area that I wanted to discuss – 
capabilities. If we rank-ordered the client’s customers by revenue they contribute and plot a chart 
of revenue per customer and the number of customers, the chart would probably look something 
like this. I’m not entirely sure if the curvature is exactly as shown. Let’s assume this is 
illustrative for purposes of discussion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the client currently makes $100 million in profit, with 3 million customers, they are at point 1 
on this chart. Their objective is to move to points 2, 3 or 4 at a higher level of profit, say $120 
million. Now, point 2 represents increasing the revenue per customer without bringing in more 
customers. We can think of this strategy as increasing the number of relationships or 
products/services that the client has with its existing customer base – a customer loyalty 
enhancing strategy. Point 3 represents an attritive strategy – eliminate unprofitable customers 
from its base so that the number of customers goes down, while revenue per customer goes up. 
This is a cherry-picking strategy. Point 4 represents an acquisitive strategy where the client 
increases its customer base while simultaneously increasing the relationships or 
products/services with its customers. Each of these strategies will result in the bottom line 
increasing, but the choice of the strategy will be based on the clients core competencies and the 
competitive assessment we have undertaken, along with a consideration of how the industry is 
likely to evolve in the future.  
 
!"This is great. So if you were in a meeting with the bank’s CEO, what would your 
recommended course of action be? 
 
Based on our discussion, my preference is to recommend the strategy that leads to point 4 – grow 
the customer base as well as deepen the relationships with the customers to enhance loyalty. This 
will probably be most successful in the long run. I must admit that this recommendation is based 
on our 20-minute discussion and wonder if there are other areas I haven’t explored. 
 
!"The point of this exercise is not to come up with a right answer. You did a good job. 
Thanks. 
Revenue  
per 
customer 
# Customers 
Profit = $100mm 
Profit = $120mm 
3 million 
1
2
3
4
