===== PDF p106 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
102 
 
15. VAT Tax Processing (Bain R2, Private Equity, M&A, Qualitative) 
Note: This is a conversational case that is testing the candidate’s ability to talk through a problem logically 
and think through various drivers. Encourage the candidate to think creatively and logically about all 
aspects of the case. 
 
Stem: Our client is a PE fund who is considering buying a Value Added Tax (VAT) processing company. 
A VAT is a form of consumption tax that is utilized is many countries outside the US. Foreign travelers are 
entitled to a refund on the VAT of purchased durable goods that they plan on taking out of the country. 
Refunds can be obtained by mailing in a VAT refund form, which can take 4 – 12 weeks, or by taking the 
VAT refund form to a processing kiosk at their departing airport. 
 
The target makes money by operating refund-processing kiosks in 36 countries and taking a 25% 
commission on any transaction. The target has an 85% market share for VAT refund-processing kiosks. 
The PE firm is concerned about their ability to grow the company and wants our opinion on potential 
growth and risks, particularly those that are outside of their control. The target has been in business for 
over fifty years, since post WWII, and the management team is comprised of 20-year veterans. 
 
Note: If candidate asks, clarify the VAT business model with an example. “If I travel to the EU, and I buy 
something in a VAT country, I ask for a VAT refund form. I complete the form and take it to customs. They 
verify the goods and the form, and stamp it. I then take the stamped form to a VAT refund processor, who 
then gives me 75% of the refund value on the spot. The processor then sends the receipt to the 
government and collects the full VAT, thus earning a 25% commission. In EU countries, the VAT is 
eligible for non-EU citizens who are taking products out of the country.” 
 
Candidate should develop a framework that includes profit growth (revenues and costs) and risks. 
 
Interviewer: Let’s start on the revenue side, what do you think is the biggest opportunity? 
 
Candidate: The main drivers of revenue are the number of transactions processed, the value of the 
refund, and our commission rate. The value on each receipt is out of our control. I know that when I 
travel, VAT tends to be an afterthought. This leads me to believe that volume of transactions is the 
biggest opportunity. Transaction volume would be driven by the percentage of people that are aware of 
VAT, and the percentage that actually redeem. Do we know what percentages of travelers are aware of 
VAT? 
 
Interviewer: We know that 40% of VAT purchasers are aware of the refund. 
Candidate: Do we know of those that are aware, what percentage actually redeem? 
Interviewer: 50%. 
Candidate: That means only 20% of the potential transactions that could be processed are. If we can 
increase this to 30%, that would be a 50% increase in revenue. 
Interviewer: Great. And what do you think are some ways to drive additional transaction volume? 
 
Candidate: Customer awareness, ease of transaction, and promotion. Awareness may include: retailer 
incentives to inform customers; general marketing, online marketing on travel websites, target online 
presence, social media. Ease of transaction may include: moving the kiosks out of airports and into cities 
or retail hubs where people can obtain immediate refunds and avoid lines, online refunds, or streamlining 
the in-airport refund process. Also, promotions, such as quicker refunds, get an additional percentage 
back. 
 
If candidate then tries to go to price as a revenue driver (e.g., commission percentage), push them to 
determine whether or not price is a big factor, and what determines price. Ask whether or not customers 
would be price elastic or inelastic. The correct answer is inelastic because 1: there are few other players 


===== PDF p107 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
103 
 
in the market, and 2: VAT refunds are like free money. Should they raise prices...? Open ended. 
 
Interviewer: Great. Now let’s look at the cost side. What do you think some of the costs are? 
 
Candidate: On the fixed side, I would think primarily overhead costs such as finance, sales, marketing, 
and administration. Also, the costs of the kiosks and kiosk support staff. On the variable side, I would 
think about any transaction costs such as processing, paper, and any fees we pay. You mentioned the 
company has been operating for 50+ years, and the management team has been in place for 20+ years. I 
would hypothesize that they haven’t shaken up their cost structure in quite a while. 
 
Interviewer: What do you think the biggest opportunity is? 
 
Candidate: This sounds like a primarily fixed cost business, where the number of transactions doesn’t 
really affect our bottom line. We could reduce fixed costs by centralizing operations or technology. We 
could also look at ways to automate administrative processes, reducing the need for staff. Another big 
opportunity could be in creating a web-based system for redemption, reducing the need for kiosks and 
kiosk staff. 
 
Interviewer: Ok, now let’s talk about risks. What do you think? 
 
I think there are three buckets: regulatory, macroeconomic, and competition. 
 
● 
Regulatory: There is a chance that the government might want to take a piece of the action. Or 
they could nationalize in certain countries, or take away VAT overall, or change the VAT 
redemption policies. 
● 
Macroeconomic: I know VAT is largely driven off of tourism and international travel, which is 
cyclical based on the economy. If there is a recession in 3 – 5 years, it may be tough for our 
target to make money regardless of what the PE firm does. 
● 
Competition: For competitors, the fact that we have 85% market share is a bit surprising. It 
doesn’t sound like there are any real barriers to entry here. I would worry about an upstart 
competitor coming in with a new model and a better cost structure that is able to undercut us and 
take share. 
 
There is no formal recommendation at the end of this case. 
