===== PDF p104 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
100 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
Major discount retailer with over 1300 pharmacies.  Pharmacy operations have flat sales in 
growing industry.  Profitability is very poor relative to industry.  Chain has history of 
decentralized pricing and promotion for pharmaceuticals, leading to strong autonomy in field 
operations, as well as wildly inconsistent pricing.  Customer pricing complaints and customer 
attrition is chronic.  New head of pharmacy operations has engaged us to “solve” the pricing 
issue.  How should we proceed? 
 
One Approach: 
 
Utilization of 3-C framework: 
• 
Who are the customers?  How do they select a pharmacy?  How important is price? 
Customers are generally older, repeat, discount-sensitive shoppers (as opposed to 
convenience oriented shoppers).  Customers may initially select a pharmacy on referral, 
location, or price and tend to build strong loyalty to pharmacy sue to personal relation with 
pharmacist and high switching costs (transfer of records, etc.…).  Price tends to be a major 
factor.  Particularly given nature of customer (usually pay in cash from fixed income) and 
trust relationship (Price fluctuations tend to be very bad).  Inconsistent pricing on a give item 
may lead to price shipping, exposing all purchases to scrutiny and losing a customer. 
• 
How do we Price?  We generally recommend a standard mark-up from cost, with price 
matching to be determined by the pharmacist at the store.  As mentioned before, this leads to 
wildly different pricing from store to store, as different pharmacists are vigilant to different 
degrees regarding optimal pricing strategies. 
• 
Who are competitors?  How do competitors price?  Competitors come in three distinct 
groups: chain drug stores (Walgreen’s, Duane Reed, etc.), independent pharmacies, and 
discount chains with pharmacy operations (Wal-Mart, Kmart).  Client is in the “discount” 
group, but competition is fierce between groups. 
 
Next step, Pricing study: Select a market basket of items in commonly dispensed quantities and 
call for prices from a selection of competitors’ and our stores across the country.  (Study finds 
that prices on high volume items are very erratic, from our prices at the higher end to well below 
cost at some discounters.  Less common items display more consistent pricing across chains, 
with our prices more or less in line.  The items with the most aggressive pricing are maintenance 
items that are taken for the rest of a patient’s life like heart, diabetes, and cholesterol.  They 
represent an unavoidable expense and customers are very sensitive to pricing on these items). 
 
Solution:  Test a pricing program where prices are set centrally for a number of stores in different 
markets.  In this test, set prices very aggressively for items identified as key items, and try to 
make up margins on non-key items.  Monitor results, adapt and roll out if volume and profits 
warrant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
