===== PDF p65 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
61 
 
1. Electrical Utility Co. (Bain Mock, Industrials, Profitability, 
Quantitative) 
Stem 
 
Our client is an electrical utility company that had negative earnings last year due in large part to a one- 
time write-off of bad debt. Our client operates in what is essentially a perfectly competitive market with 
30+ competitors. The way our client’s industry works is this: customers typically have 12-24 month 
contracts and incur minimal switching costs when moving from one electrical utility company to another. 
 
Our client has brought us in for two reasons: (1) to figure out why profitability has fallen and (2) to help 
them improve profits going forward. 
 
Provide the following information only if asked: our client does not generate its own electricity and instead 
re-distributes it. 
 
Structure 
 
A good structure should include Profitability and Electrical Utility Market Dynamics. The structure can also 
include other things such as Firm Capabilities or Customer. 
 
Part 1 – Profitability 
 
Candidate: I’d like to understand more about the revenue model. Do you have any information on the 
price point or demand for our client’s services? 
 
Interviewer: Great question. Our client charges $0.10 / kwh for its services, which is in line with the 
market rate over the last few years. On the quantity side, our client currently serves ~1M customers per 
year and has for the last several years. Furthermore, the demand for each house has remained steady at 
1000 kwh / month. 
 
Candidate: Thanks. So, it seems that our client’s price is in line with the market, which makes sense 
since this market is very competitive. Also, it looks like quantity hasn’t really changed at all either. Given 
that price and quantity haven’t changed much, I’d like to turn my attention to the firm’s cost structure. 
 
Interviewer: That sounds great to me. What do you think some of our client’s key cost drivers are? 
 
Candidate should structure his or her cost drivers into Fixed Costs and Variable Costs. Some fixed costs 
include salaries, SG&A, and regulatory fees. Some variable costs include electricity, marketing, 
installation, fees to the grid, and customer acquisition costs. 
 
Interviewer: Perfect. What do you think the most important cost drivers are? 
 
Candidate should hone in on the fact that energy costs are the highest. 
 
Interviewer: Correct, energy costs are the largest. In fact, our client makes a 10% margin on electricity 
transmission. What else? 
 
Candidate should clue in on the fact that acquisition costs and churn are important costs since this is a 
highly competitive market and switching costs are low. 
 
Part 2 – Customer Lifetime Value 


===== PDF p66 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
62 
 
Interviewer: Great. I have a little more information about the economics of the firm. First, our client’s 
relationship with a customer can be broken down into three stages: (1) sign-up, (2) on-flow, and (3) 
termination. 
 
During the sign-up phase, our client pays $50 to sign up a customer, which is an all-in figure that includes 
things like installation, marketing, salaries, etc. Worth noting is that if a customer has a low credit score, 
our client collects a $100 refundable deposit. 
 
During the on-flow stage, our client pays $7 per month to service a customer. 
 
For the termination phase, our client has two types of customers: good customers and bad customers. 
Good customers pay their bills on time and leave with zero balance. Bad customers on the other hand do 
not pay for their last two months. After two months of unpaid service have elapsed, our client will 
disconnect a bad customer from the grid, incurring a cost of $75. At this point, a bad customer may 
choose to restore his or her service or not. If he or she chooses to restore service, the customer must pay 
the two months’ outstanding balance as well as a $100 reconnection charge. If the customer does not 
restore service, our client sends the customer to a debt collector at a cost of $50 per customer. The debt 
collector has a 50% success rate in collecting a customer’s outstanding payments. 
 
What I would like you to do is calculate the customer lifetime value of a bad customer who chooses not to 
reconnect his or her service. Assume the customer originally signed a two-year contract. 
 
Candidate should identify all costs and revenues. This question can be particularly tricky because 
Interviewer intentionally leaves out revenue information (which can be calculated with information 
previously given in the case) and cost-of-energy information (ditto). Do not provide the table below to 
Candidate. 
 
 
 
Costs 
Amount 
Notes 
Revenue 
Amount 
Notes 
Sign-up 
50 
Electricity 
2200 
0.10/kWh * 1000 
hr/mo * 22 mo [Note: 
22 mo instead of 24 
mo since last 2 
months are unpaid] 
Electricity 
2160 
0.09/kWh * 1000 hr/mo 
* 24 mo 
Refundable 
deposit 
100 
Overhead 
168 
7/mo * 24 mo 
Expected 
Revenue 
from debt 
collector 
100 
200 outstanding 
balance * 50% 
success rate 
Disconnection 
fee 
75 
Termination 
fee 
50 
Total 
2503 
Total 
2400 
 
Candidate should end up with a customer lifetime value of -103. 
 
Candidate: Looks like the customer lifetime value is -103. Wow – right off the bat it looks like these 
customers could be contributing to our client’s profitability issues. I’d love to learn a little bit more about 
how prevalent these bad customers are. 


===== PDF p67 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
63 
 
 
Part 3 – Customer Segmentation 
 
Interviewer: I actually have some more information on that. Why don’t you take a look at this breakdown 
of our client’s customer base and let me know what you think? 
 
Candidate: Wow! The first thing I notice is that half of our client customers are unprofitable and 30% are 
wildly unprofitable. Given our client’s objective, I’d like to think about what we can do to improve 
profitability. 
 
Interviewer: Sounds good to me. What are your thoughts? 
 
Candidate should structure his or her brainstorming in a logical way such as Increase Number of Positive- 
Value Customers vs. Decrease Number of Negative-Value Customers. Some ideas for increasing the 
number of “good” customers include: reducing the sign-up fee (for medium and above credit scores), 
introducing “loyalty” bonuses, try to differentiate the service through high quality, etc. Some ideas for 
decreasing the number of “bad” customers include: increasing the sign-up fee (for low credit scores), 
charge a higher deposit, re-examining marketing channels, etc. 
 
Part 4 - Recommendation 
 
Interviewer: That all sounds reasonable. So, our client just walked in – what is your recommendation? 
 
Candidate: You asked us to do two things: (1) determine why profits are falling and (2) come up with 
ways to improve them. First, profits have fallen largely due to churn and your customer mix. We 
determined that 50% of your customers are unprofitable and 30% are worth -$350 each. In order to 
improve profitability, we recommend you decrease the number of negative-value customers by raising 
your deposit and increase the number of positive-value customers by introducing loyalty bonuses. In 
terms of next steps, I’d like to analyze which of these strategies to implement first. In terms of risks, it is 
possible that these changes might invoke scrutiny from regulators or upset the general public. That said, 
improving your customer segmentation looks like a great way to improve your firm’s profitability going 
forward. 
