===== PDF p30 =====
CASE 13:  MANUFACTURING (BCG – Round 2)         
 
 
 
 
Your client is a private company that manufactures switches for machine tools.  The switches 
serve one purpose:  to stop the machine instantly.  Failure to do so may result in damage to the 
machine and/or the machine operator.  Given the following constraints, how can the company 
make more money? 
• No changes can be made to the product line 
• You only have your current customers  
• No international expansion 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Our switches (and our competitors’ switches) have never failed.   
• Our customers have dealt exclusively with us for several years, although there is no exclusivity 
contract. 
• The sales force has strong relationships with the customers, so they just take the orders each year. 
• Cost of machine tools that our customer makes: $60,000. 
 
Company 
Price/switch 
Mkt Share ($1B market) 
Our Company 
100 
30% 
Competitor 1 
120 
60% 
Competitor 2 
80 
10% 
 
 
 
25
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
I asked for revenue information for us and our competitors (provided above).  When I asked about 
perceived quality of our product, I was told that it is comparable to that of both our competitors.   
 
I made an observation that customers are not very price sensitive and suggested raising the price of 
our product 20 – 25%.  My interviewer asked why that number and not a bigger number, so I 
defended my recommendation.  
 
He then changed gears and asked me which company I would acquire if I could acquire one of 
my competitors.   
I mentioned anti-trust issues associated with acquiring Competitor 1.  Then I did the math and 
determined that it would be advantageous to acquire Competitor 2 (C2) and raise the price of our 
switches to $125.  This would provide increased revenue and would price us only 4% over our only 
other competitor.  Other aspects of acquiring Competitor 2 include the risk of turning off C2’s 
customers by a price increase, but they are unlikely to leave, since there is not much difference in 
price between $125 (us & C2) and $120 (C1). 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
This is a common type of question that can be simply and effectively answered by using a standard 
framework. I would approach it as follows: 
 
If we are looking at increasing revenue then obviously we need to look at how we could increase 
either the quantity sold or the price at which we sell our product. 
 


===== PDF p31 =====
Looking first at our quantity, it appears there are a number of restrictions. You have mentioned that we 
have only our current customers and that we cannot expand internationally. Other things we would 
need to know are: 
• Do our current customers take all their product exclusively from us or do they take some 
product from our competitors also? If they also take product from our competitors then we may 
be able to increase our sales quantity by some sort of exclusivity arrangement – capturing all of 
the demand from our existing customers.  
• I would also want to know whether there are other machines at our existing customers’ 
factories that are suitable for our product but where it has not been installed. If so then 
convincing customers to install our product in these other machines would be another way to 
increase sales and we may need to look at changing or adapting our sales force and marketing 
strategy. 
 
Next, I would look at ways that we can increase price. We are told that we can’t change the product so 
we will need to determine if we can persuade our customers to pay more for the existing product. Do 
we have any information on the prices and volumes sold by our competitors? (In response to this you 
would expect to get the information provided in the case above) 
 
We can see from our competitors’ sales data that the competitor with the highest price also has the 
highest market share. This suggests that we may be able to increase our price without adversely 
affecting our sales (in fact it may even increase our sales if price is seen by customers as a proxy for 
quality) 
 
Before recommending a price increase however I would want to understand if there are any other 
factors justifying our competitor’s higher price and high market share. Do they have a bigger sales 
force? Do they sell through different channels? Are they entrenched as the industry leader/standard? 
Do they have better after sales service? Do we target a segment that is more price sensitive than our 
competitor? [The answer to these questions may affect whether recommending a price increase is 
appropriate. Given the way the case has been set up, it seems like the focus is going to be on price 
elasticity so presumably most of these avenues would be closed down by the interviewer, but asking 
these questions would help to complete the case answer in a MECE fashion.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26
