===== PDF p35 =====
Table of Contents 
 
31
Practice Case 14: Chicago transit Authority  
(Diamond Cluster - Round 1) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer  
 
Our client is the Chicago Transit Authority (CTA). They have received 
$300MM and want us to identify which of the 20 different technology 
projects should be implement and in which order. Currently, they 
have a 30 year old Mainframe system. They have written 
bridge/translation code to interface with some of their newer 
systems. However, everything is controlled by this mainframe. How 
would you advise them? 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:  
• 
CTA is a public service. They may take on negative NPV projects if it 
serves the public. They may also prioritize based on public, not 
financial, needs. 
• 
CTA does not want to fire its employees. 
• 
Almost all CTA technology employees know only old mainframe 
systems. 
• 
No one knows the original code for the mainframe system. Bug fixes 
are being done by people who only know bits and pieces of the 
system. 
• 
CTA has enough money to do all 20 projects. 
• 
The mainframe system in use is from 1970s and there are not many 
people who can support it. However, almost all systems are controlled 
by this system. 
• 
There are two high profile projects ñ ERP system, and Smartcard for 
toll booths. 
 
III. Sample solution: 
First I analyzed the mainframe core. I would first assess the impact of each 
project on three areas of CTAís technology infrastructure: 
1. Impact on the core mainframe system. 
2. Impact on translation/bridge software. 
3. Impact/requirement for new system. 
 
I would then assess the person hours needed to implement the project. I 
would then organize the projects using the following criteria: 
1. How critical is the project to public needs? 
2. Does the project impact critical systems of existing infrastructure? 
3. Economic impact of project ñ measured in dollars and person hours. 
4. Personnel training required for new system. 
 


===== PDF p36 =====
Table of Contents 
 
32
I looked briefly into the two high profile projects, using the criteria above. I 
guessed that the Smartcard project is more critical and I would choose that 
over an ERP implementation. 
 
This case was really about keeping the business goals of the client in mind. 
The most important issue was to realize that CTAís goal is NOT to cut costs 
but to provide service. I was later told that CTA had enough money to do all 
the projects. They were required to implement some money losing projects 
as well because they were legally obligated to implement them. The 
interviewer also wanted to see what criteria I would use to prioritize different 
projects. He wanted to see if I could logically structure my approach, and 
assess the impact of my recommendations on the technology infrastructure 
and business goals of the client. 
