===== PDF p98 =====
Table of Contents 
 
94
Practice Case 41: London Museum  
(Mckinsey - Round 1) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:    
 
Your client is a London Museum which has an ìencyclopedicî range 
of attractions. They receive 5M visitors a year and currently break 
even with 50M £ of revenues and costs. 
 
The government has told them that they are withdrawing 5M £ of 
funding next year and the museum has hired us in to look at some of 
their costs and revenues streams. 
 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:   
 
Touring Exhibits 
• 
One revenue stream is touring exhibitions. Each year the museum sends 
on average 12 exhibitions to another museum. The average cost per 
exhibition is 60k.   
• 
Revenues for touring exhibits over the last seven years: 80K, 70K, 70k, 
60k, 40K, 40K and 50K. 
• 
Variable costs comprise most of the exhibits cost (insurance, traveling 
curator, transportation) 
 
Capital Investments 
• 
Each year they get 6M £ to invest in capital projects and they want us to 
determine their returns. 
 
Previous year investments 
• 
£1.5M in building maintenance 
• 
£3 in fixing the main courtyard and advertising that it was fixed.  (most of 
it was spent on advertising) 
• 
£1.5M on installing security cameras. 
 
 
• 
The additional advertising brought in an extra 10% of visitors.  
o Each visitor brings in £3 in contributions from fees and £3 
contribution from profits in the gift shop.  
o Assume visitors will not come again and will not tell any friends. 
 
• 
The security cameras are part of a 5 year project where the same amount 
of money will be invested each year.  
o Museum saves 500K on security guards for first 5 years 
and £1M in perpetuity.  
 


===== PDF p99 =====
Table of Contents 
 
95
 
III. Sample Solution:   
What are your thoughts? 
 
Well the total average income over the last 7 years is 410K and the total 
average cost is 420k. Hence on the average we loss money ñ ignoring any 
discount factor. 
 
OK, What do you propose: 
 
An number of options: 
Focus on the big exhibits which make money and cut out the small, less 
profitable ones. 
See if we can send exhibits to more than one location 
Only do exhibits in the Good years, and store them during the bad years. 
 
OK, lets focus on sending them to more than one museum. What do you 
think the costs are? 
 
Obviously there will be some fixed costs to get each exhibit ready, but the 
main costs will be variable, in particularly insurance and specialized 
packing/transportation. So it may only be profitable to send to more than 
one location if the additional transport costs are smaller than the net 
revenues. 
 
Excellent, they also send a curator along with each exhibit. The museum 
asked us to look at their capital budget. Each year they get £6M to invest in 
capital projects and they want us to determine their returns. 
 
This year they invested º in building maintenance,  in fixing the main 
courtyard ñ but actually when we dove into the costs we found that the 
majority of the money was spend advertising to people that they had fixes 
the main court yard ñ and º on installing security cameras. 
 
Extra info: 
The additional advertising brought in an extra 10% of visitors and the 
security cameras is part of a 5 year project where the same amount of 
money will be invested each year. We expect during the installation that we 
wills save 500K on security guards and after the project is complete we will 
save 1M / year on security guards. The building maintenance is fixed and 
hard to calculate a return on. 
 
Each customer brings in a £6 contribution. 500,000 visitors extra = £3M 
additional revenues. Was told to assume that these extra visitors will not 
come back and that they will not tell their friends. Expenditure is £3M, hence 
a zero NPV project.  
Suggested looking at other ways to better spend their advertising money to 
increase their NPV.  However, on the whole as museums will be stewarded 


===== PDF p100 =====
Table of Contents 
 
96
towards maximizing the number of people that come through so this 
advertising investment makes some sense even if the NPV is negative. 
 
During the building of the security cameras the net costs are: 
 
• 
Year 1 ñ 5, 1M net costs. Then from year 6 onwards I make 1M savings 
• 
Assumed a 10% cost of capital and a perpetuity for the savings, although 
stated that a) the cameras will need annual maintenance and b) they will 
need to be replaced every 10 - 20 years or so. However can approximate 
to a perpetuity of savings. 
• 
Perpetuity of savings is 10M in year 6. 
• 
Present Value of savings (I had to estimate) is 6M 
• 
Present value of net costs is (again estimates) at 4M 
• 
Hence the NPV is +2M. 
• 
Hence this is a positive NPV project and should be encouraged.  (n.b 
actual NPV calculation is +1.8M) 
 
Also said that all these investments are sunk costs and what we also needed 
to look at was future investment plans. 
 
 
 
 
