===== PDF p27 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
23 
 
 
9/ 
Case Examples 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Easy 
Company: BCG 
9.1 Discount Retailer 
 
Step 1: Actively listen to the case 
Your client is the largest discount retailer in Canada, with 500 
stores spread throughout the country. Let’s call it CanadaCo.  For 
several years running, CanadaCo has surpassed the second- 
largest Canadian retailer (300 stores) in both relative market 
share and profitability. However, the largest discount retailer in the 
United States, USCo, has just bought out CanadaCo’s 
competition and is planning to convert all 300 stores to USCo 
stores. The CEO of CanadaCo is quite perturbed by this turn    of 
events, and asks you the following questions: Should I be worried? 
How should I react? How would you advise the CEO? 
 
Step 2: Establish understanding of the case 
So, the client, CanadaCo, is facing competition in Canada from  a 
U.S. competitor. Our task is to evaluate the extent of the threat 
and advise the client on a strategy. Before I can advise the CEO 
I need some more information about the situation. First of all, I’m 
not sure I understand what a discount retailer is! 
A discount retailer sells a large variety of consumer goods at 
discounted prices, generally carrying everything from house 
wares and appliances to clothing. Kmart, Woolworth, and Wal-Mart 
are prime examples in the U.S. 
 
Step 3: Set up the framework 
Oh, I see. Then I think it makes sense to structure the problem 
this way: First, let’s understand the competition in the Canadian 
market and how CanadaCo has become the market leader. Then 
let’s look at the U.S. to understand how USCo has achieved     its 
position. At the end, we can merge the two discussions to 
understand whether USCo’s strength in the U.S. is transferable to 
the Canadian market. 
That sounds fine. Let’s start, then, with the Canadian discount 
retail market. What would you like to know? 
 
Step 4: Evaluate the case using the framework 
Are CanadaCo’s 500 stores close to the competition’s 300 stores, 
or do they serve different geographic areas? 
The stores are located in similar geographic regions. In fact,   you 
might even see a CanadaCo store on one corner, and the 
competition on the very next corner. 
Do CanadaCo and the competition sell a similar product mix? 
Yes. CanadaCo’s stores tend to have a wider variety of brand 
names, but generally, the product mix is similar. 
 
Are CanadaCo’s prices significantly lower than the competition’s? 
No. For certain items CanadaCo is less expensive, and for others 
the competition is less expensive, but the average price level is 
similar. 
 
Is CanadaCo more profitable just because it has more stores,   or 
does it have higher profits per store? 
It actually has higher profits than the competition on a per- 
store basis. 
 
Well, higher profits could be the result of lower costs or higher 
revenues. Are the higher per- store profits due to lower costs than 
the competition’s or the result of higher per-store sales? 
CanadaCo’s cost structure isn’t any lower than the competition’s. 
Its higher per-store profits are due to higher per-store sales. 
 
Is that because it has bigger stores? 
No. CanadaCo’s average store size is approximately the same as 
that of the competition. 
 
If they’re selling similar products at similar prices in similarly-sized 
stores in similar locations, why are CanadaCo’s per-store sales 
higher than the competition’s? 
It’s your job to figure that out! 
 
Is CanadaCo better managed than the competition? 
I don’t know that CanadaCo as a company is necessarily better 
managed, but I can tell you that its management model for 
individual stores is significantly different. 
 
How so? 
The competitor’s stores are centrally owned by the company, 
while CanadaCo uses a franchise model in which each individual 
store is owned and managed by a franchisee that has invested  in 
the store and retains part of the profit. 


===== PDF p28 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In that case, I would guess that the CanadaCo stores are probably 
better managed, since the individual storeowners have a greater 
incentive to maximize profit. 
You are exactly right. It turns out that CanadaCo’s higher sales are 
due primarily to a significantly higher level of customer service. 
The stores are cleaner, more attractive, better stocked, and so on. 
The company discovered this through a series of customer 
surveys last year. I think you’ve sufficiently covered the Canadian 
market-let’s move now to a discussion of the U.S. market. 
 
How many stores does USCo own in the U.S., and how many 
does the second-largest discount retailer own? 
USCo owns 4,000 stores and the second-largest competitor owns 
approximately 1,000 stores. 
 
Are USCo stores bigger than those of the typical discount retailer 
in the U.S.? 
Yes. USCo stores average 200,000 square feet, whereas the 
typical discount retail store is approximately 100,000 square feet. 
 
Those numbers suggest that USCo should be selling roughly eight 
times the volume of the nearest U.S. competitor! 
Close. USCo’s sales are approximately $5 billion, whereas the 
nearest competitor sells about $1 billion worth of merchandise. 
 
I would think that sales of that size give USCo significant clout with 
suppliers. Does it have a lower cost of goods than the competition? 
In fact, its cost of goods is approximately 15 percent less than that 
of the competition. 
 
So it probably has lower prices. 
Right again. Its prices are on average about ten percent lower 
than those of the competition. 
 
So it seems that USCo has been so successful primarily because 
it has lower prices than its competitors. 
That’s partly right.  Its  success  probably  also  has  something to 
do with a larger selection of products, given the larger average 
store size. 
 
How did USCo get so much bigger than the competition? 
It started by building superstores in rural markets served mainly 
by mom-and-pop stores and small discount retailers. USCo bet that 
people would be willing to buy from it, and it was right. As it grew 
and developed more clout with suppliers, it began to buy out other 
discount retailers and convert their stores to the USCo format. 
 
So whenever USCo buys out a competing store, it also physically 
expands it? 
Not necessarily. Sometimes it does, but when I said it converts it to 
the USCo format, I meant that it carries the same brands at prices 
that are on average ten percent lower than the competition’s. 
 
What criteria does USCo use in deciding whether it should 
physically expand a store it’s just bought out? 
It depends on a lot of factors, such as the size of the existing store, 
local market competition, local real estate costs, and so on, but   I 
don’t think we need to go into that here. 
 
Well, I thought it might be relevant in terms of predicting what it will 
do with the 300 stores that it bought in Canada. 
Let’s just assume that it doesn’t plan to expand the Canadian 
stores beyond their current size. 
 
OK. I think  I’ve  learned  enough  about  USCo.  I’d  like  to ask a 
few questions about USCo’s ability to succeed in the Canadian 
market. Does USCo have a strong brand name in Canada? 
No. Although members of the Canadian business community are 
certainly familiar with the company because of its U.S. success, 
the Canadian consumer is basically unaware of USCo’s existence. 
 
Does CanadaCo carry products similar to USCo’s, or does the 
Canadian consumer expect different products and brands than the 
U.S. discount retail consumer? 
The two companies carry similar products, although the Canada 
Co stores lean more heavily toward Canadian suppliers. 
 
How much volume does CanadaCo actually sell? 
About $750 million worth of goods annually. 
 
Is there any reason to think that the costs of doing business     for 
USCo will be higher in the Canadian market? 
Can you be more specific? 
 
I mean, for example, are labor or leasing costs higher in Canada 
than in the U.S.? 
Canada does have significantly higher labor costs, and I’m not 
sure about the costs of leasing space. What are you driving at? 
 
I was thinking that if there were a higher cost of doing business in 
Canada, perhaps USCo would have to charge higher prices than 
it does in the U.S. to cover its costs. 
That’s probably true, but remember, CanadaCo must also cope 
with the same high labor costs. Can you think of additional costs 
incurred by USCo’s Canadian operations that would not be 
incurred by CanadaCo? 
 
USCo might incur higher distribution costs than CanadaCo 
because it will have to ship product from its U.S. warehouses up 
to Canada. 


===== PDF p29 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
25 
 
 
You are partially right. CanadaCo has the advantage in distribution 
costs, since its network spans less geographic area and it gets 
more products from Canadian suppliers. However, since CanadaCo 
continues to get a good deal of products from the U.S., the actual 
advantage to CanadaCo is  not  great-only  about  two  percent of 
overall costs. 
 
All this suggests that USCo will be able to retain a significant price 
advantage over CanadaCo’s stores: if not ten percent, then at 
least seven to eight percent. 
I would agree with that conclusion. 
 
Step 5: Summarize and make recommendations 
I would tell the CEO the following: In the near term, you might be 
safe. Your stores have a much stronger brand name in Canada 
than USCo’s, and they seem to be well managed. However,     as 
consumers get used to seeing prices that are consistently seven 
to eight percent less at USCo, they will realize that shopping at 
USCo means significant savings over the course of the year. 
Although some consumers will remain loyal out of habit or because 
of your high level of service, it is reasonable to expect the discount 
shopper to shop where prices are lowest. Moreover, over time 
your brand-name advantage will erode as USCo becomes more 
familiar to Canadian consumers. You certainly have to worry about 
losing significant share to USCo stores in the long term. You should 
probably do something about it now, before it’s too late. 
 
Can you suggest possible strategies for CanadaCo? 
Maybe it can find ways to cut costs and make the organization 
more efficient, so it can keep prices low even if its cost of goods 
is higher. 
 
Anything else? 
It might consider instituting something like a frequent shopper 
program, where consumers accumulate points that entitle them to 
future discounts on merchandise. 
 
What might be a potential problem with that? 
Well, it might not be that cost-effective, since it would be rewarding 
a significant number of  shoppers  who  would  have  continued to 
shop there anyway. 
 
Any other suggestions? 
CanadaCo might want to prepare a marketing or advertising 
campaign that highlights its high level of service. It might even 
institute a CanadaCo Service Guarantee that surpasses any 
guarantees offered by USCo. 
 
Assuming the only way to keep customers is through competitive 
pricing, is there anything CanadaCo can do to appear competitive 
to the consumer? 
It might want to consider offering fewer product lines, so that it can 
consolidate its buying power and negotiate prices with suppliers 
that are competitive with USCo’s. It might lose some customers 
who want the  variety of products that  USCo has, but it may     be 
able to retain the customer who is buying a limited array of items 
and is just looking for the best price. 
 
All of your suggestions  are  interesting,  and  you  would  want to 
analyze the advantages and disadvantages of each in more detail 
before making any recommendations to the CEO. 
 
Additional Case Questions 
By the time you’ve gone through the case interview example and 
the interactive case you probably will have developed a good idea 
of what a case interview is all about. The best way to prepare for 
a case interview is to practice a few. Ask a friend or career 
counselor to give you a case using the sample cases below. 
