===== PDF p27 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
23  
5.3. 
Growth Strategy Case (Specialty Chemicals) 
Source: Deloitte Consulting, LLP 
Length: Long (30-45 minutes) 
 
Case Scenario 
The client is a $250 million Performance Chemicals division of a $7 billion Specialty 
Chemicals Company. 
The CEO of the parent company has set a “growth agenda”. He believes that his company 
can become the fastest growing chemical company (moving from 3-4% historical growth 
to 10-15% growth) and has asked the business units to develop and present growth 
strategies to him.  
Performance Chemical’s business manager, like many other managers in the company, 
does not believe that there is significant untapped potential in the markets served by his 
unit. He has approached Deloitte Consulting for strategic advice. 
 
Key Questions 
How would you go about building a case for whether or not Performance Chemicals 
division can grow at a 10%+ per annum rate? How will you approach this problem? 
Develop potential growth strategies and recommendations for the Performance 
Chemicals management team. 
 
Possible Recommendations / Approaches & Key Issues That Should be Covered 
Consider Market Issues (Market Size, Customers, Competitors) 
What is the expected growth rate of the existing business? All the 6 businesses have been 
growing at 3-4% for the last 5 years. This is the same as the average growth rate of the 
markets served. 
What are some of the products sold by this division? Performance Chemicals division 
sells asphalt additives, sodium chemicals, paper pulp bleaching solutions etc.  
How would you describe the competitive environment? All the products have limited 
intellectual property protection and are being threatened by global competition. 
Commoditization and pricing pressures are constraining the growth of these businesses.  
It is clear that the company has to look beyond traditional product strategy to generate 
the warranted growth. What are some of the trends you would look for? E.g. outsourcing, 
solutions vs. products, product-service bundles etc…. 
 
Understand Company Capabilities (i.e., Feasibility) 
Are there any cultural impediments to growth? The company has like any other chemical 
company focused solely on selling products and has not been seeking growth ideas. 
Quote from the Client “We make it by the ton and sell it by the carload” describes the 
business thinking at the client. 
 
Probable Growth Strategies 
Develop a simple framework to explore growth opportunities. E.g. Growth Spectrum may 
include Product Enhancements, New Products, New Markets, New Channels, New 
Business Models. 
Alternative growth strategies for Performance Chemicals division – e.g.,  


===== PDF p28 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
24  
• Sell a solution not a product 
• Become indispensable to strategic customers 
• Become one-stop shop for specialty chemicals 
• Vendor managed inventory system as a service to customers 
 
Case Wrap-Up 
The Deloitte team performed a growth diagnostic to understand the culture and 
infrastructural impediments to growth. It conducted 2-day workshops with each of the 
niche businesses to develop alternative strategies using the Valuable Formula 
methodology of the strategy practice. Some of the strategies included product-service 
bundling, outsourcing, and new markets for the existing technological capabilities. The 
preliminary projections indicated the potential of quadrupling the size of Performance 
Chemicals group to $1 Billion in 5 years. The client agreed with Deloitte Consulting’s 
recommendation and has implemented a subset of the strategies. 
 
