===== PDF p63 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 58 
 
 
Tuck Consulting Club 
What’s a bar worth? 
Case Description:  The case investigates the question, what is a bar worth and whether someone 
should open a bar.  Great introductory case! 
 
Inventory: [no exhibits] 
 
Industry: Hospitality 
 
Potential applicable frameworks: 
 
 Profitability  
    3 C’s 
 
 Value Chain  
 Microecon. Analysis 
 Market Entry     
    4 P’s 
 
 Supply Chain  
 Internal / External 
 Competitive Threat     Porter’s 5 Forces 
 Market Sizing 
 Other 
 
Introduction 
 
As you know I am a manager for company X (doesn’t matter which one, you choose).  I travel a lot 
and last Thursday I was in San Francisco, working in the finance district.  It had been a hard week, 
where I had already pulled about 60 hours, so I decided to get a drink around 8 PM.  I walked across 
the street and found a martini bar. 
 
After ordering myself a drink, I decided to take the place in.  It was packed!  So, I started thinking 
to myself, maybe I should open a bar.  I am working long hours, and maybe this might be an 
opportunity to see my family more.  But, I want to know more about this opportunity. 
 
Question 1: So, that’s what I want you to investigate for me today.  What is a bar worth? 
 
Question 2 (not asked, but implied in the above description): Should I invest in a bar? 
 
 


===== PDF p64 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 59 
 
 
What’s a Bar Worth? (continued) 
 
Case Details 
 
Question 1: What is a bar worth? 
 
Info to be given as case progresses: 
• None 
 
Info to be given if asked: 
• Direct the interviewee to investigate the question 
• Eventually we need to get to the profitability of a bar and for simplicity’s sake, we 
should use the one described above 
• Push the person to explore the different types of revenues a bar might have 
• They need to derive drink revenues from the following: 
o There were 100 people in bar when you entered and when you left 
o You had two drinks in an hour 
o You noticed that the bar was open 6 days/week, 8 hours per day 
o The price of a drink is $10 
o The number of people visiting the bar on weekends is 120 
• Push the person to explore a bar’s different types of costs  
• They need to derive costs from the following: 
o There was one bartender and one bus boy 
o They should estimate all other costs (materials, wages, insurance, license, 
utilities, rent, etc.) 
• Once at the solution, ask the interviewee if the number is reasonable 
 
Exhibits  
• None 
 
Question 2 (not asked, but implied in the above description): Should I invest in a bar? 
 
Info to be given as case progresses: 
• None 
 
Info to be given if asked: 
• Repeat any of the above lead in paragraph, but the interviewee in the conclusion should 
create the recommendation based on the profitability 
 
Exhibits  
• None 
 


===== PDF p65 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 60 
 
 
What’s a Bar Worth? (continued) 
 
Recommended Solution 
 
Question 1 Details 
• The candidate should attempt to value a bar from one of the following: 
o Intrinsic value (what does it mean to you) 
o Brand value (the value of franchising a bar) 
o Profitability (what is the profitability of a bar) 
 
Question 2 Details 
• Broader question of whether this individual should invest in this bar 
• Maybe if highly profitable, but needs to consider the hours required 
• No if marginally or not profitable 
 
Overall Recommendations 
 
A good answer includes: 
• An approximation of the profitability of the bar described by the interviewer 
• An estimation of the revenues from drinks 
• An estimation of the costs from labor, materials, and overhead 
 
A better answer includes: 
• Derivation of the revenues based on hourly consumption and occupation 
• Acknowledgement of multiple, possible revenue streams (food, cover charge, 
cigarettes/cigars, etc.) 
• Acknowledgement of multiple, possible costs (rent, licensing, insurance, marketing, 
utilities) 
 
A superior answer includes: 
• At least three ways that one could value a bar 
• Derivation of the revenues based on variable hourly consumption and occupation, 
depending upon time of day and day of week 
• Derivation of the costs based on real world experience: 
o Liquor based on size of bottle and shots in a drink 
o Rent based on square footage 
o Wages based on similar jobs 
o Utilities based on personal monthly costs 
• A conclusion that takes in the considerations of whether or not the interviewer should 
buy this particular bar 
 
