===== PDF p14 =====
 CASE 4:  PERPETUAL MOTION (Bain – Round 1) NEW PRODUCT/MARKET ENTRY                 
 
I was flying back from my client the other night, and working away on my laptop. Beside me 
was seated a mad scientist, who engaged me in conversation, and was excited to find out I was a 
consultant. It seems that he has created a perpetual motion machine. It requires no energy, and 
keeps on going. He wants to know how to make money with it. 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• No additional information provided 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
• We started with a general framework on the things I would cover. She pushed me into the category 
of what it might be used for and we stuck on cars.  
 
She asked me what the size of the opportunity could be. 
I did a quick market sizing, based on the # of cars in the US, and what % I would guess are traditional 
fuel vs. alternative fuel (a small %) and then assumed a % of those bought new cars yearly and ended 
up with a large #. (40B, I think)  
 
What would convince these people to buy our technology in their cars?  
I talked about value proposition, pricing, awareness, proof of technology.  
 
How would we convince the traditional fuel customers to buy this? 
*  no response provided 
How would you price this? And how would this change over time?  
I talked about making sure we covered our COGS, and then looked at EVC especially in terms of 
actual fuel costs and time spent refueling, environmental feel good factor etc. I thought that initially 
we’d price at a premium and later in the life cycle when it was more mature, I figured we’d potentially 
be competing on price since other alternatives may creep in.  
 
What would GM think of this if we were to approach them with it?  
I talked about how they would probably be thinking about the fact that their bread and butter business 
(traditional fuel) would be threatened, but ultimately they would need to decide whether they thought 
the competitors would come out with this before them, or whether they would want to be the first to 
market with it. I also talked about how it may take a while to implement because of operational 
difficulties, design etc.  
 
Would you invest with the Mad Scientist, if he asked you to? Why?  
What is your 30 second elevator speech to Warren Buffet?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9


===== PDF p15 =====
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
Looking at the potential to use this technology in cars is clearly a great option and the case approach 
that the interviewee went through looks pretty good.  
 
Starting from a more generic level however I would probably tackle the question as follows: 
 
If we look at the benefits of a perpetual motion machine, it is basically a source of energy. In assessing 
potential applications of the technology then I would ask the question “Where is there the greatest 
demand for energy?” or “Where is the best market for a new source of energy?”  
 
This could lead to a reasonable discussion of a number of different options: energy at home, energy in 
industry, energy in transport. Transport makes sense as a market to drill down on this product because 
it is clearly such a large source of energy consumption. 
 
From a pricing perspective you may need to think about the price of the technology as against the 
savings that it generates. You would need to ensure there was still sufficient savings to justify 
consumers wishing to try a new technology. Equally it would be important that the mad scientist 
prices the product so that car manufacturers can implement the technology profitably.  
 
30 second speech: 
This is a source of limitless energy. As energy demand continues to grow it becomes a more and more 
precious resource. Who would not want to invest in a limitless source of a precious resource? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
