===== PDF p103 =====
Case: Car Company
A.T. Kearney, Round 2
Frank is 65 years old, and for his entire working career, has owned a manufacturing company which manufactures unibody car 
frames.  He has always had one contract with one vehicle OEM, however this year that OEM has decided not to renew its contract. 
What should Frank do?
Problem statement narrative
99
This is a high-level strategy case.  The interviewer should 
guide candidate into exploring Frank’s various options and 
ultimately weighing each option to determine which he 
should take.  Various frameworks could be used to explore 
Frank’s options in the industry , including, but not limited to a 
Value Chain Analysis or Five C’s.  
Case Type: Market Strategy
Overview for interviewer
The reason Frank’s longtime customer has decided to end 
their contract with Frank is because a new type of welding 
technology is being used to make unibody frames, and 
Frank’s plant does not support this technology.  
This new welding technology will soon be mandated for cars 
by governing regulatory body.
Frank’s company is privately owned, 100% by him, with an 
annual contract revenue of $5M.
Frank has won numerous production efficiency and supplier 
quality awards.
His supply chain is almost fully optimized, however he could 
source some materials elsewhere and save $100K / year.
Information to be provided upon request


===== PDF p104 =====
Case: Car Company
Potential Categories of Candidate’s Framework
Notable comments / potential discussion points
However the candidate chooses to address Frank’s options, he should recognize that Frank’s revenue has been eliminated in its
entirety so his focus must be responding / repositioning in order to survive:
Value Chain Analysis (where can Frank gain advantages to lower his cost base or better meet customer demands?)
•
Design / R&D 
•
Supply Chain Management
•
Production
100
•
Distribution
•
Customer Management
Profit Drivers
• Revenue (Can Frank provide his product to other customers, can Frank adapt his plant to manufacture products for other 
customers, Can Frank lease out his facilities to others?)
• Costs (What will it cost Frank to upgrade his facility?  What will it cost Frank to manufacture other products?  What will 
Frank have to invest to gain new customers?)
5 Cs:
• Customers (Frank currently has one customer, can he expand that?)
• Costs (Where can Frank cut costs  What will it take for him to upgrade his facility and adapt the new technology)
• Competition (Where is Frank’s competition positioned?  Are there others in his position?  Are there markets where Frank 
can explore that are more profitable?)
• Company (What are Frank’s companies strengths?  Can that be adapted to another market/customer?)
• Context ( What is causing the change in customer behavior?  Can Frank do anything to shape the regulatory environment 
or get ahead of future changes?)


===== PDF p105 =====
Case: Car Company
Potential Issue Tree & Approach to Solving the Case
Key elements of analysis to solve the case
• Design & R&D
• Supply Chain Management
• Production
• Distribution
• Customer Management
Value Chain (Profitability)
While cost is covered in value chain 
discussion, the other “C’s” can help 
determine potential alternatives: 
• Customer
5 C’s
While cost is covered in value chain 
discussion, the other “C’s” can help 
determine potential alternatives: 
• Customer
5 C’s (Continued)
101
Customer Management
(Basic Math should be done to determine Frank 
will not be profitable if he upgrades since 
Frank wants to see a return on any investment 
within 2 years)
Customer
• Company
• Competition
• Context
Customer
• Company
• Competition
• Context
Possible follow-up and guidance 
to interviewer
Possible follow-up and guidance 
to interviewer
Possible follow-up and guidance to 
interviewer
For Frank to invest and upgrade his facilities he 
will have to invest $10M.  His current (soon to 
be expiring contract is $5M and all-in costs are 
$4.5M).  If Frank were to relocate, his upgrade 
costs would remain the same (patented 
technology would still have to be purchased.)  
Frank can make a few cuts in his supply chain 
and save $100K.  Frank cannot save in 
distribution and end customer costs as the OEM 
he serves is right next door.  Frank has won 
numerous production awards for being a lean 
plant.    
Customer:  It will be difficult for Frank to 
find new customers for his current technology 
since that technology is being replaced per 
regulations.  If he were to upgrade his plant, 
potential new OEM customers have signed 
long-term contracts with Frank’s competition.
Company:  The strengths of Frank’s company 
lies in the R&D and design of the unibody
frame technology.  Frank’s company does not 
sell anything else, nor does it have high 
brand recognition other expertise.
Competition:  Frank’s competitors have 
signed contracts with other OEMs and some 
have diversified portfolios.  All have adapted 
the new technology.  
Context:  Frank is 65 years old and would 
like to spend more time with his grandkids.  
He could consider lobbying the regulatory 
body for a freeze on the changes, but this 
would require a longer-term, dedicated 
effort. 


===== PDF p106 =====
Case: Car Company
Sample Recommendation
Based on analyzing Frank’s value chain/profit drivers, the strengths/weaknesses of his company, the market, Frank 
should exit the current market as he is currently the sole proprietor and quickly aging.  The costs of implementing the 
new regulatory technology are high, and it does not appear that Frank would be able to recoup them in his required 
2-year turnaround.  Therefore Frank should begin to develop an exit strategy, which may include a sale to a strategic 
buyer that can make use of his existing assets and/or has more patience to make longer-term investments.
Recommendation
If Frank were to close his company, he would need to consider closure costs, including any long-term supplier contracts, 
outstanding debt, warranties, union fees, potential ill will in the community.  
Risks
Frank should further explore if any of his current equipment, technologies can be adapted to make new products and the 
costs/revenues although initial signs (his company’s strengths are not in new technology) indicate this may be difficult
Next Steps
102
costs/revenues, although initial signs (his company s strengths are not in new technology) indicate this may be difficult.  
Frank should explore salvaging current assets and/or selling the business outright.
Next Steps
BONUS
Who may be potential buyers for Frank’s business?
•
Strategic buyers / competitors: Frank’s underlying 
technology may still be attractive in some ways.
•
Financial buyers: probably not given difficult growth 
story, but perhaps as part of an industrial roll-up 
strategy of similar businesses.
