===== PDF p55 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 52 
 
Case 23: Supply Chain for defense contractor 
Company: A.T.Kearney 
 
A defense contractor procures materials from multiple vendors and supplies materials to a defense 
organization. The defense contractor is experiencing problems meeting its cost and delivery 
commitments. The firm's Vice President has sought the help of AT Kearney to help diagnose 
problems in the company's supply chain. 
 
Questions: 
1. At a very high level, how would you breakdown the supply chain for such a company? 
For a supply chain design the candidate should be willing to explore the following 
a. Number of Products 
b. Number of customers 
c. Product demand 
d. Transportation 
e. Inventory 
f. Any warehousing decisions 
g. Location of factory  
h. Customer location 
i. Flow of information 
 
2. We find that Material Costs are 75% of total costs, and fixed o/h and labor are 25%. What are 
some ways of reducing Material costs? Some answers 
- Consolidate suppliers or Change suppliers 
- Bring in a procurement team that can negotiate better prices with suppliers 
- Launch a continual improvement program with vendors (like what Toyota does) 
 
3. This is how the buying process of our procurement organization works:  
Engineers submit a set of designs to a procurement representative. Our representative makes an RFP 
(Request for Proposal) to several suppliers; suppliers return with bids and the procurement 
representative chooses a supplier. Let us take the example of buying printed circuit boards 
a. What are the criteria that you would consider to select suppliers? Assume that we're buying about  
    10,000 circuit boards per month 
b. What is the advantage of a large supplier vs. small? Which would you go with? 
c. Would you choose suppliers with their own fabrication units or those that outsource 
manufacturing? Should the fabs be within the US or outside? What are the security implications? 
 
4. What are some ways of making our procurement process more efficient? How can we cut 
inventory   and inbound delivery costs? 
 
5. You bump into the VP in an elevator. Give him a 20 second elevator pitch of all your findings and 
hypotheses. 
 
 
 
