===== PDF p88 =====
10. Spanish Trains (McKinsey) 
Stem 
The railway company of Spain (RENFE), a former monopoly, is now opening to competition. 
RENFE has been divided into two separate companies: RENFE (train operation) and ADIF 
(company that manages the tracks, train stations and traffic control). A friend of yours has 90M € 
and has approached you for.advice on starting a new train operation company to compete against 
the new RENFE. In particular, he wants to start by opening a new high speed train route between 
Madrid and Barcelona. Should your fi"iend go ahead and launch the business? 
Phase 1: Industry Overview 
Behind the scenes: Let the candidate to lay out his framework and stati brainstorming about the 
current situation in the industry: competitors, and competitive situation. Give the following 
information when asked the proper question. Let him or her focus on competition, and the 
differences between this new venture and the competition. 
Case Information: 
Main competitors: RENFE and air travel. Evaluate p1"ice, time and convenience 
Us vs. RENFE: 
" 
We are less expensive 
• 
We are more efficiently rim (as a former monopoly, RENFE is very inefficient) 
• 
Equal travel time 
" 
We are equally convenient (same stations and tracks) 
Us vs. air travel 
• 
We are less expensive 
" 
About equal in time overall (discuss how this can be: check-in time, luggage pick -up, 
delays, traffic) Either one can be faster or slower depending on some of the factors above. 
• 
We are more convenient (none of the factors cited above with air travel) 
Key Insight: As a result of this high-level analysis, it is possible that we have a chance in this 
market. Now let's evaluate profitability. 
Phase 2: Business Overview 
Interviewer: Now that we have identified the main issues in the market, it is time to see whether 
we can be profitable·. How would you evaluate the viability of your friend's business? What do 
you think the main costs and revenue streams are? 
Possible Answers: Possible fmms of revenue: tickets (main revenue driver), ads in trains, food 
and dl"inks, and any others are good for the brainstonning but should be ignored for the 
calculations 
2008-2009 Case Book 
83 
·'! 
i 
I 
I I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
' ' 
' ' 


===== PDF p89 =====
Costs: Marketing, Operations and maintenance, trains, personnel, IT, etc. 
Interviewer: Great. Now, before moving on let me tell you about oper,ations. You can travel by 
train between Madrid and Barcelona in 
4 brs. Trains run from Sam until 1 Opm. Taking 
into account all different factors, we can mn two round trips per day. We will need three trains, 
as well as one for backup in case of breakdown, i.e. total4 trans and 4 trips per day. 
Phase 3: Break even Calculations 
·Interviewer: What do you need to calculate expected profits? Keep in mind that the company 
only has 10 years to pay back the investment. 
Behind the scenes: The candidate should ask specifically for all the costs needed. 
" 
Trains: 30M € per train (tell the interviewee to think of this only at the end) 
• 
Marketing: 15M € per year 
• 
Operations/Maintenance: 1OM € per year 
• 
Train fares: Trains have a capacity of 500 people 
o If tickets cost 40€-795% occupancy 
o If tickets cost 50€-780% occupancy 
o If tickets cost 60€-760% occupancy 
Interviewer: Given this data, how much do you think the tickets cost? 
Interviewee: 40€ -7 (.95 * 500) * 40 = 19,000 euros per trip 
50€ -7 (.8 * 500) * 50 = 20,000 euros per trip 
60€ -7 (.6 * 500) * 60 = 18,000 euros per trip 
Key Insight: It is most profitable to set ptices at 50 euros. 
Interviewer: Now figure out the profits per year (assuming above costs are per train) 
365 days* 20,000 euros per trip* 4 trips per day= 29.2M € in revenue per year 
29.2M- 25M (marketing and operations)= 4.2M euros profit per year per train 
Because we on average operate only 3 trains we disregard the cots in apex and maintenance for 
the fourth train. Total estimated operating profit is therefore 12.6 M euros. 
Key Insight: This does not look great- it would take almost 10 years to recoup the 120M Euro 
investment in 4 trains. 
Recommendations 
Interviewer: What would you recommend your friend? What options could you consider to 
make the business more profitable? 
Possible Answers: He should not invest under the cun·ent circumstances, but may also explore 
options such as leasing trains, additional revenue from onboard sales and advertising, JV with a 
foreign operator with excess capacity, etc. (ask for brainstorming ideas) 
2008-2009 Case Book 
84 
