===== PDF p46 =====
 
CASE 21:  CPG - BEER (Booz-Allen – Round 2)      
 
Our client is a CPG company.  Assume they make beer.  They are going through a merger.  
Assume our client is Firm A (acquirer) and the target is Firm B.  Firm A holds 20% of the 
market and Firm B holds 10% of the market.  A major player, Firm C, holds a leading share of 
the market at 45%.  The rest of the market is comprised of fringe players.   
 
Can you find the cost synergies in the merger, and can you discuss their relative importance? 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
41
 
• The companies (Firms A, B, C) each have only one major manufacturing facility. 
• Each company has one major brand in each of 3 areas: 
(a) Flagship brands which are highly profitable  
(b) Maintenance brands which are marginally profitable and  
(c) Cash cows / “milk” brands which are non-growth but provide a steady source of revenue to  
the companies. 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
• I discussed synergies, segmenting them into marketing synergies, distribution synergies, raw 
material sourcing synergies, and then possible brand synergies (i.e. do we use the merger as a 
chance to reposition brands, shut brands down, start new brands, etc.?).   
• It was clear that the interviewer wanted me to spend much of my time discussing the issue of 
brands and their impact.   
• I then suggested 3 categories of strategic alternatives for Firm A, our client:  
(a) Keep flagship brands of both Firm A and Firm B after the merger 
(b) Shut one of the two brands down after the merger 
(c) Keep one, but reposition the second instead of shutting it down completely, and  
(d) Combine the brands into a totally new brand. 
 
• Of my four options described above, I assessed each one in terms of the revenues and in terms of 
the costs.  I then was able to come to a logical conclusion about the relative level of risk – risk of 
market share loss, risk of profit loss, risk of customer rejection, etc. 
• The issue of Firm C stealing market share while the new (Firm A + Firm B) merged company 
repositioned itself was important to recognize. 
 
Recommendations: 
 
The initial question relates to the identification of synergies. I would structure my approach to this by 
working through the value chain: 
• Raw Materials purchasing – there may be some small economies of scale here in the 
acquisition of ingredients (e.g. hops) but given these two companies are already major players 
they are probably both already operating at scale so the cost savings here would probably be 
minimal 
• Production – the potential for savings here depends on how the companies currently operate. I 
would want to know whether either company has excess capacity that could be 


===== PDF p47 =====
utilized/eliminated post merger and whether there is the potential for consolidating the existing 
manufacturing facilities. Depending on the answer to these questions the potential for savings 
could be significant. 
• Distribution – again this depends on how the companies currently operate. Are both 
distribution networks currently at full capacity? Do they both distribute in different regions, 
creating complementarities and the potential to expand distribution for the products of both? 
Do they both have in house distribution? Or is distribution outsourced? Depending on the 
answer to these questions the potential savings could be anywhere from zero to extremely 
significant. 
•  Sales and Marketing – from the interviewee’s comments, it appears that this is the area that the 
interviewer wanted to focus on. There may be the potential for some basic savings through the 
elimination of duplication in head office marketing roles and perhaps the consolidation of 
external agencies used for marketing work. There are also the more significant potential 
synergies through the streamlining of branding. It is here that you could get in to discussing 
what to do with each of the various brands and clearly the most important decisions relate to 
what to do with the flagship brands. Depending on where the interviewer wants to focus, I 
would probably recommend approaching this by saying that for each of the brands you have 
three alternatives: keep the brand as is, reposition the brand, or terminate the brand entirely. In 
making this decision for each brand you would need to consider the incremental revenue 
impact for that brand, the incremental revenue impact for our other brands, and the costs of the 
repositioning or closing down (if that is the decision). This is a relatively loose sub-framework 
for this issue but you would expect that where you go will really be driven by the information 
that you get from the interviewer. 
 
 
 
42
