===== PDF p39 =====
CASE 17:  ELECTRONICS RETAILER (BCG – Round 2)          
 
Your client is a major consumer electronics retailer who sells A/V equipment, computers, 
content (CDs, DVDs), and software.  Recently, the store has seen increased competition from 
bricks and mortar stores like Wal-Mart as well as online retailers like Dell.  Your client has 3 
questions: 
1) How is the industry evolving? 
2) What is the winning retail model? 
3) What should we do? 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• None provided 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
Q:  To answer these three questions, I’d like to look in 3 areas.  First I’d like to know more about the 
current market including understanding customers, the products they are buying, and how these have 
changed over time.  Next, I’d like to take a look at the different types of competitors that are affecting 
our company and our firm’s profitability.  Lastly, I’d like to know more about our client in terms of 
their business model, including core competencies, strategic direction, and their store model, to better 
understand what options are realistic.  Is there a particular, place you would like me to start? 
A:  Before we get started, can you tell me what you think makes a successful retail model? 
 
Q: Sure.  I think there are several elements.  First, I think that a retailer needs to have a clear 
understanding of their customer base.  This will drive two things: having the appropriate product mix 
to serve them and serving them through the appropriate distribution channel (online vs brick and 
mortar).  Secondly, while the above two factors are critical, our client needs to ensure that they will 
allow for profitability and so careful consideration needs to be paid to revenue and cost considerations.  
Lastly, to the extent that is possible, we would want to make sure that our business model is not easily 
duplicated so that we can maintain a competitive advantage. 
A:  Sounds good.  Let’s focus on the CD/DVD market.  What are the differences between the two 
categories? 
 
Q:  There are potential differences between consumers as DVDs don’t have as high an adoption rate as 
CDs.  There are also potential differences between age groups of consumers – I would think younger 
people might buy more audio products than older people. 
A:  Those are reasonable.  What about in terms of title fragmentation? 
 
Q:  I would think that DVDs are much more consolidated in terms of titles as 10 blockbusters a year 
probably account for the majority of sales.  I’m not sure this applies to CDs which I would think have 
a much wider distribution in terms of titles. 
A:  How do you see consumer buying patterns change? 
 
Q:  More and more, consumers are buying content directly.  You can buy songs directly over the 
Internet decreasing the need to buy entire CDs.  You can also get video on demand removing the need 
to buy DVDs. 
A:  So what are the implications of this? 
 
 
 
34


===== PDF p40 =====
 
 
35
Interviewee’s Solution (cont.): 
 
Q:  From the perspective of our client, CDs and DVDs are not going to be a substantial part of their 
business going forward because the ability to buy content directly from producers removes the 
middleman.  Our client will more directly need to rely on other parts of its product mix in order to be 
successful.  In the interim, it is critical that our client manage the transition carefully in order to 
maximize the opportunity associated with this closing window which will likely last for several more 
years. 
A:  Agreed.  So, let’s assume that we did some additional analysis and it turns out that our client 
needs to double the volume of its other products to counteract this.  Fixed costs don’t grow in 
proportion to sales – they grow on a 75% scale curve meaning that even though sales double now 
FC are only 75% of what they were on a % of revenue basis.  Our gross margin is 25% and net 
income is 0%.  What would our net income be if we doubled volume? 
 
Q:  Let’s say that Year 1 revenue was $100 making operating profit 25 and fixed costs 25.  In Year 2, 
we would make $200 and our operating profit would be $50.  Given the scale curve, our FC should be 
about $38 giving us net income of $12 or 6%. 
A:  Exactly.  
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
This is a fantastic sample case because the dialogue provided by the candidate demonstrates exactly 
what the case interview experience can end up being like. Most importantly it demonstrates exactly 
how that experience can differ wildly from what you were originally expecting, and what the case 
interview books tell you to expect. 
 
At the outset of the discussion, the candidate develops a framework for answering the question. All 
they have to do now is walk through that framework right? 
 
Wrong. 
 
After the candidate sets out the framework, the interviewer then practically takes over, firing questions 
at the candidate, choosing a particular market to focus on, and never really giving them a chance to 
thoroughly walk through their carefully laid out framework. The poor candidate is left feeling totally 
defensive, thinking on their feet to come up with answers to the interviewer’s interrogation rather than 
having the chance to ask the questions and gather information at their own pace. 
 
If this happens to you (and it undoubtedly will), don’t panic!!  It is quite common and not necessarily  
a bad thing. Despite not getting a chance to do their own analysis this candidate has still nailed the 
case because they set out a good framework and gave intelligent answers to the interviewer’s 
questions. 
 
This is my assessment of what is going on and why this happens so often: 
• Case interviews are about giving the firm a chance to gain an insight into your thought 
process – can you think like a consultant. 
• The candidate set out a reasonable framework (not necessarily the only one but a 
reasonable one) and the interviewer has taken this as a sign that they know what they are 
doing. The framework in and of itself is 80% of the answer to the case. 
 


===== PDF p41 =====
 
 
• The interviewer then chooses not to let you walk through the framework, either because 
they are bored with having asked the same question ten times already that day or because 
they think they doing so will give them very little extra insight into your thinking beyond 
what they already got from hearing what your framework was going to be. 
• Instead they choose to test you more deeply by asking you a series of questions that give 
them more insight into your ability to really understand and think about a business 
problem or market. 
• Far from being a sign of failure, getting grilled with questions in this fashion may 
actually be a sign that you are doing well. 
 
Note, there is a fundamental difference between interviewers asking you questions to prompt 
you because you don’t seem to know what you are doing and interviewers asking you 
questions (as in this case) because they are really testing you. 
 
Don’t assume you can sit back and let them ask you the questions they are interested in. You 
cannot. You are always responsible for driving the case and you need to set out a framework 
and start working your way logically through it. If however, at some stage during this process, 
the interviewer starts firing questions at you then you need to be able to work with it.  
 
Answer their questions as insightfully as you can and let them take you where they want to go.  
Think about what things would be like in the real world – How would the CD market be 
different to the DVD market? You must have had plenty of experiences with both so apply 
some common sense and you are more than half way to a decent answer. 
 
If the questions run out, then tie everything back in to your original framework and keep going. 
But more times than not the questions will only run out when they bring you to a case 
conclusion.  
 
These interviews can be terrifying because you fell like you have lost control, but they can also 
be the most rewarding and, in my view, are the ones most likely to earn you an offer. 
 
 
 
 
 
36
