===== PDF p11 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
6 
2. Las Vegas Casinos 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Type of Case: Business Transformation 
Difficulty: Low 
 
Opening 
 
Your client has a chain of hotels across the USA with locations primarily in gambling cities 
(e.g. Las Vegas and Atlantic City). The client has been in the business for a number of years 
and is particularly concerned with the performance of their hotel in Las Vegas. They have 
come to your firm for advice on how to improve the overall business, but specifically the 
performance of the Las Vegas Hotel. The Las Vegas hotel is old and requires modernization. 
Should the client knock down the hotel and start again, or renovate whilst open for business? 
 
What factors would you consider in helping the client, and what recommendations would you 
give? 
 
Background  
 
- 
Operations:  
o Each hotel has a casino 
o Hotels are located in gambling centers and they are all profitable (assume 
equally) 
- 
Client:  
o Family-owned business and shareholders are risk averse in nature 
o Sufficient funds are available and any future investment can be funded through 
equity 
o The current state of the economy can be discussed here, e.g. lack of liquidity in 
the market is not a concern since the project can be funded using equity. 
However, equity may not be worth as much since the market is down 
o Competitive position - second tier of hotels behind the major hotels e.g. Mirage 
 
Areas of Discussion  
 
Focus on the Las Vegas hotel. This case is just a practical discussion of issues and does not 
have any quantitative analysis. 
 
1. Option 1: Knock down the hotel and start again 
o Trade-off between loss in profitability and incremental profitability from having 
improved hotel. Detail main cash outflow items e.g. construction, rebranding 
efforts etc 
o Construction period will be shorter and more scope to change the hotel’s 
appearance 
 
 


===== PDF p12 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
7 
2. Las Vegas Casinos continued…  
    
 
 
 
 
o What do you do with staff during construction period? Fire them, paid leave or 
redeploy elsewhere in the business? What type of staff do you have – part-time 
or full-time? 
o Brand impact from not having presence in Las Vegas during the construction 
period 
o Major cash outflow during the period from capital investment and little coming 
in – should not be a major issue given the cash-rich shareholders 
o Competitive response in mid and upper tier hotels. Need to ensure that 
refurbishment is sufficient to house new gambling innovations and modern 
hotel rooms 
 
2. Option 2: Renovate whilst open for business 
o Receive income during renovation period 
o Renovation will take longer as likely to go floor by floor 
o Disturbance to guests may lead to brand issues and may reduce repeat customer 
business.  However candidate may debate if most Las Vegas customers repeat 
customers, or is LV an once-in-a-lifetime experience for the majority? This may 
depend on the typical clientele of this establishment 
o Cash outflow more steady but not really an issue for the client 
o Scope for refurbishment is less if you renovate in same building vs. knocking 
the building down 
 
3. Other issues 
o Execution on renovation: Will the project finish on time? Monetary penalties for 
construction team? 
o What specific renovations should be made, e.g. type of gambling 
table/restaurant/bar etc.? 
o Lessons to be learned from competitors undertaking similar project? 
o How to launch business on completion? Marketing campaign? 
 
Analysis  
 
No calculations. At most, discuss how calculations would be made. 
 
Recommended Conclusion 
 
This is a suggested answer. The answer does not matter as long as there is a logical framework 
with solid arguments to back up the conclusion. 
The client should knock down and start again based on the reasons above, and brief discussion 
of practical issues that should be taken into account. 
 
 
