===== PDF p69 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
65 
 
 
Case 18: Institutional Asset Manager Fees 
 
OVERVIEW 
Firm:       BCG 
Round:    2006 FT, Final 
Content:  Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
BCG has been hired by an institutional asset manager client.  The client is very profitable and 
doing well.  However, they know that they are leaving money on the table: they know that they 
have a lower average percent fee of assets under management than their competition—lower 
than the industry average.  They’ve hired BCG to tell them why that is, but in the end we told 
them more than that. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
Recommended Approach 
This case dives right into data and question and answer.  There’s a question that the client asked, 
but the interviewer hinted up front in the case question that he/she wants the interviewee to do 
more than just answer the client’s question.  This is a good case for practicing looking at data 
and taking the case interview past answering the question and more towards “fixing” the 
business problem. 
 
The interviewer should expect the interviewee to drive the case, but should provide the data 
(exhibits 1 &2) up-front pretty quickly and make sure that the interviewee understands the 
industry and how the fee structure works very early on. 
 
Key Facts 
- 
Institutional asset managers’ revenues are based on fees from clients.  Clients are charged 
a fee, which is structured by some percentage of assets under management.  You can 
assume 5% if it makes the discussion easier—though, the percent fee never comes up. 
 
- 
Institutional asset management companies are companies like Fidelity.  They can serve 
any sort of large, investing clients—pension funds, CalPers, TIA-CREF, hospitals, 
foundations, universities, etc.  They do have retail division that serve individuals with 
their 401Ks and mutual funds, b ut this case focuses on the institutional investor side of 
the business. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
Interviewer: So, first do you have any questions? 
 
Interviewee:  Sure, I want to make sure that I understand how the client’s business works.  I 
don’t know too much about institutional investors or asset managers; so, I’d like to just make 
sure that I understand the business model before we dive into the problem. 


===== PDF p70 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
66 
 
 
Interviewer:  Sure, that makes sense.  What can I tell you? 
 
Interviewee:  I imagine that an institutional asset manager is a company like a Fidelity, or 
Capital Group Companies. 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right. 
 
Interviewee:  And I bet that their clients can range from anyone—you and me investing our 
savings in a mutual fund to large investors like pension funds. 
 
Interviewer:  Yep, that’s right.  Pension funds like TIA-CREF and CalPers, or foundations and 
universities are some of the bigger clients.  We’re going to focus on that part of the business—
the institutional investor part of the business, not on you and me and our individual 401-Ks. 
 
Interviewee:  Great.  And you said that they generate revenues from fees which are based on a 
percent of assets under management? 
 
Interviewer:  Right.  What’s your sense of how that percent might change? 
 
Interviewee:  My guess is that larger clients—clients with larger amounts of assets under 
management—might have a lower percent fee charged to tem, because they still generate more 
revenues with a smaller percent fee. 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  In fact, I have an exhibit that shows you what that looks like.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It’s a stepped function. What would you image the cost structure of different size clients is like? 
 
Revenue Structure for Institutional Asset Management
Fee on 
Assets 
Under 
Management 
(%)
$ Under 
Management
Exhibit 1


===== PDF p71 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
67 
 
Interviewee: Huh.  Well, I don’t know the business to well, but I imagine that it costs about the 
same to service a large client as it does a small one. 
 
Interviewer:  Yes, that’s correct. So, what does that tell you? 
 
Interviewee:  That tells me that large clients—in terms of assets under management—are highly 
profitable because they generate more in revenues—even with smaller percentage fees—at 
basically the same cost as a small client.  Thinking back to the original question of the case: why 
does the client have a lower average fee than the rest of the industry, I now want to know more 
about the fees that they’re charging different customers.  
 
(If the interviewee did not get these points, it’s not a big deal.  But it is important to show them 
how the fees are structured and explain that larger clients generate more revenues and cost the 
same as any other client—therefore, they’re highly profitable clients.) 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right on track.  Let me show you some data that we collected on the percent 
fees—and discounts—that they’re giving to their customers.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What does this data tell you? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, it’s not what I would expect.  It looks like they’re giving some of the highest 
discounts on their fees to their mid-sized clients, not to their largest ones.  This may be keeping 
the profitability high on their large clients, but it’s probably destroying margins on their mid-
Discounts by Deal
% 
Discount
$ Under Management
(in MN)
10
1,000
100
10,000
10
60
70
80
90
100
30
40
50
20
Exhibit 2


===== PDF p72 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
68 
 
sized clients, and bringing down their overall fee average.  I think this shows the answer to the 
client’s question. 
 
Interviewer:  Sure.  Now here’s another question: if you were the client, what would you want to 
see here? 
 
(Here, the interviewee should generate a few ideas.  A bunch are listed—if they get one or two, 
that’s great, and you can move on.  Also, it might help the interviewee to give them the exhibit so 
that they can draw on it—if that makes them more comfortable or helps them at all.) 
 
Interviewee:  Well, I would want to see a few things.  First, I would want to be giving the 
biggest discounts, or the most discounts, to my larger clients.  Here, it looks like they’re giving 
the biggest discounts to the mid-sized clients.  Second, there doesn’t seem to be any sort of cap 
on the amount of discount that can be given.  They’re discounting up to 90% in some cases—I 
would think that that would destroy all profit margins.  I would expect for there to be a cap 
around 30% or something.  Last, it all seems pretty random where the discounts are given.  I 
wonder whether the clusters of discounts represent a certain salesman/  account executive. 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  So, what are the key steps that you need to take to fix the problem? 
 
Interviewee:  Well, first, you have to diagnose why the discounts are the way they are right now.  
So, look-up who discounted what—see whether it’s saleperson-driven, or if it’s driven by the 
type of client.  Then, you would need to monitor the discounting and keep track of it.  Maybe 
you can incent the salespeople not to give discounts? 
 
Interviewer:  Yep.  That’s right: monitoring and tracking, and then put in whatever systems are 
necessary to get the company’s average fee up to at least the industry average.  Great.  That’s it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
