===== PDF p78 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
74 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Our client is a major pharmaceutical company based in the U.S. with international reach.  They 
are known in the industry for their cancer drugs.  Recently, the company has experienced a 
decline in sales growth and is considering a new business opportunity.  The U.S. market has 
many private companies that focus solely on cancer care.  The client wants to own and operate a 
chain of private cancer care centers in China.  These would be “out patient” type centers where 
patients could come in for treatments; long and short-term stays are possible.  How would you 
evaluate the attractiveness of this opportunity? 
 
I would evaluate the market for such a center in China: demand, competition and regulation.  I 
would also assess the profit potential of the opportunity and consider if the company can take 
advantage of its strong reputation. 
 
To assess the demand for the cancer care center, we would need to determine the number of 
people in China with cancer.   
 
!"How would you estimate that? 
 
Well, we can look at the number of people currently being treated through cancer care units of 
hospitals, private care, etc. Alternatively, we could estimate the percentage of the population 
with cancer by looking at affliction rates across various countries and then multiply by the total 
population of China. 
 
!"Ok, let’s say that this is a large number and it is growing…what next? 
 
Well, I want to look at the competitors in the market.  You said the U.S. market already had a lot 
of cancer care centers; I’d want to find out who the major competitors are in China. 
 
!"Actually, there are no cancer care centers like this currently in China; it would be a new 
concept.  Who do you think the competitors would be for our client? 
 
I would assume hospitals, nursing homes, private nurses.  Also, China has a history of treating 
ailments through herbs and other natural substances; these old world physicians are probably a 
major competitor. 
 
!"You’re right.  When we worked on this project, we found that a significant number of 
patients were being treated under these methods.  Let’s say there is still room in the market 
for our client to enter despite this.  What else would you look at? 
 
Well, then it comes down to the profitability of the centers.  Profits are comprised of revenues 
and costs.  Let’s look first at the revenues, which are comprised of the number of treatments and 
the price per treatment.  Since the center would focus strictly on cancer, I would assume the 
quality of the service would be better than the competition.  [Interviewer nods yes].  Therefore, 
we could probably charge a premium for the treatments.   
 
!"Oh?  Do you think you can?  Who is paying for the treatments? 
 


===== PDF p79 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
75 
Hmm…you have a good point.  Here in the US, the patient’s healthcare plan covers the cost of 
the treatment.  Can you tell me about China’s medical care policies?  Do healthcare companies 
insure consumers? 
 
!"Actually, in China the government pays for all healthcare.  In fact, the government has 
predetermined fees that it will pay for all kinds of treatments.  They will not pay for more 
than that amount. 
 
I see.  So our client cannot charge a premium and expect the government to cover the expenses.  
At the same time, since our client is providing premium service, I would expect that their costs 
are higher than those of hospitals, etc.  Our client may not even be able to cover the cost of the 
care they want to provide through the predetermined rates.  [Interview nods yes.]  Ok, so now we 
have a different scenario.  I think the client needs to assess if there is sufficient demand amongst 
the wealthier segments of the Chinese population for a cancer care center.   
 
!"How would you determine the size of this new market? 
 
Well, I think we can first segment the population of China based upon income and focus in upon 
the top income levels.  We can then apply the percentage of cancer incident to this number to 
estimate the number of potential cancer patients in the selected segments.  Perhaps we can 
calculate the cost of serving each patient and fixed costs to determine a breakeven number of 
patients.  We can compare this breakeven number with the total potential cancer patients to 
determine the market share the client needs before they can turn a profit.  Hopefully, this market 
share is reasonable and the client can move forward. 
 
!"Well, you’ve covered most of the points that we looked into.  Great job!  Our client actually 
did move forward with the opportunity and was very successful.   
 
 
