===== PDF p54 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
50  
5.15. Water Utility Company  
Length: Medium (30 Minutes) 
 
Problem: 
Your client is a German owned water utility that is headquartered in the Northeast United 
States.  The water utility serves the majority of the northeast area and is the exclusive 
provider or water in the region.  Internally, the client measures its performance using a 
version of the EVA (economic value added) financial valuation technique.  This 
technique emphasizes the corporate return as a function of profits and a capital charge 
(essentially the return that capital assets produce).  The EVA function can be written as: 
 
EVA = Net Operating Profits – (WACC*Capital Asset Base); which essentially is “un-
levered” operating income (after tax) less the fair return on invested capital.   
 
Currently the client is operating at a negative EVA level.  How would you go about 
getting EVA to the value of zero and eventually turning it positive?  What are the various 
ideas you would explore: 
 
Solution: 
When I first got this case, I was only vaguely familiar with EVA based on some work in 
corporate finance, and I made sure to ask a couple of questions about the formula to 
ensure I understood it.  It was not critical to the case to be an EVA expert, but you needed 
to understand what the equation was saying.  The key part was recognizing that the 
weight of the equation resides with the first term (meaning Operating Profits have a 
larger effect on EVA because the other component of the equation is the WACC (a 
percentage figure multiplied by the capital assets of the firm).  A candidate should come 
to this conclusion on his/her own.  If not, then the interviewer should point it out if the 
candidate struggles. 
 
Once you understand that Operating Profits drive a large portion of EVA, you need to 
explore what effects operating profits, but don’t completely ignore the capital asset base 
as you want to be comprehensive in your analysis.  A good place to start would be 
exploring top line revenue implications, and then to explore the cost elements (or vice 
versa).   The candidate should also explore what assets are driving the capital asset base.  
Lastly, a solid candidate cannot ignore regulatory issues in this case, and should mention 
them in the course of the discussion. 
 
The case had no real answer per say, but was more about exhaustively testing ideas.  A 
good interviewer should be creative in challenging the candidate to go in multiple 
directions beyond the information provided below. 
 
Information To Be Provided If Requested: 
• Revenues have been relatively flat over the past 12 to 18 months.  Majority of 
revenue comes from residential and commercial water usage (billed on a 
consumption basis per month) 


===== PDF p55 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
51  
• Pricing is based on usage, and is not really capable of being altered significantly 
due to regulations  
• There have not been significant changes to the capital base, which is primarily 
made up of machinery and equipment for water filtration and delivery 
• Costs have been relatively stable on the whole. 
• The water utility has the capacity to serve more customers 
 
Essentially, what you have is a situation where the company needs to grow to increase its 
revenue base.  An ability to add additional customers would be a good idea, as the 
company effectively has additional capacity.  The candidate should explore potential 
growth scenarios and should rebound when he/she hits a dead end.  Some potential 
growth ideas might include: 
 
• What about providing bottled water (e.g. a different channel?) 
o Good idea, but likely difficult to implement without incurring additional 
costs for distribution, packaging, branding, etc 
• What about expanding into other regions? 
o Possible barriers could be regulatory concerns and other competitors 
o Past history dictates local people and businesses are not supportive of 
expansion by this company 
 Candidate should ask why? 
 Recall it is a German company, and there has been a bit of resentment 
on the socio-political front for this company to expand based on its 
history of acquiring other local US companies in the past. 
• Based on past history, merging with another entity and dropping the German 
name might be a good idea 
 
