===== PDF p55 =====
Case 15:Engine Manufacturer                     -medium-                   Accenture, Round 2 
50 
 
 (Source: Case Interview from Accenture, Round 2) 
 
Context 
The client is an engine manufacturer that designs and builds engines for large commercial trucks. They 
have designed a new engine with significant new technology and significant new content. It will meet 
all federal guidelines for at least 10 years. 
The client has spent significant R&D money on this engine and expects to be able to charge a premium 
price to recoup the investment. However, the client’s largest customer, representing 60% of all sales, 
has been complaining about quality. 
Our research has shown that although our client promised their customers in terms of soot emissions 
less than 3k ppm, but they are currently seeing 20k ppm. (ppm=parts per million) 
What is wrong and what should they do? 
 
 
Ok, so in order to identify the problem we need to assess all the stages that the new product is going 
through from the design to the moment it is ready to be sold to the customers.   
- 
We first need to understand what is changed in the design vs. the last model and if the new 
design is meeting the customer requirements.  
- 
Then we need to look at the manufacturing process in terms of technology used, labor, if there 
is something that was needed to be changed and was not.  
- 
We also need to investigate the parts supply for the product and understand if anything 
changed in regards to the components that we are using for the new engine. 
- 
 Last but not least I would like to see the main symptoms that customers claimed and compare 
them with the previous engine. 
 
 
Information provided upon request: 
 
Product Design: Design process was unchanged for this engine. All testing was done the same as with 
historical products.  However, the FMEA analysis (Failure, Modes, and Effects Analysis -Used to 
identify and assess the ramifications of possible product defects) was skimped on.  The significant new 
technological components of the engine were developed according to the client’s standard process. 
 
Manufacturing: Plant uses a highly skilled and educated workforce.  There is no learning curve 
associated with the assembly of this product. 
 
Service: Client utilizes field technicians at the customer site.  They are the ones reporting the warranty 
data to the client.  They are well educated on the product. 
 
Sub-assembly procurement: Traditionally, client used few suppliers who delivered large sub-
assemblies.  Now, in an effort to save costs, they have sourced many more suppliers to get the best 
price for each component and are choosing to do more of the assembly themselves.  However, all of 
these suppliers are delivering products that meet the specifications delivered by engineering. 
 
Defect Details:
 
 See next slide for Pareto detailing top warranty issues. 
Customers: Customers are concern regarding the quality of emissions. 


===== PDF p56 =====
Case 15: Engine Manufacturer                    -medium-                   Accenture, Round 2 
51 
 
Chart provided upon request: 
 
 
From the information provided it seems that there is nothing wrong with the new technology. 
 
Interviewer: Great. So where do you think the problem comes from? 
 
I believe that one major change that the company made is in the base of suppliers, going from a limited 
number of suppliers to a bigger number of suppliers. Is the fact that they have more suppliers and are 
assembling the components in house a cause of the claims that we see in the warranty claim chart? 
 
Interviewer: Yes. You are right. Although each supplier is delivering to specification, there are 
tolerances in these specifications.  
• 
Since the client is accustomed to specifying sub-assemblies, the tolerances were not 
tight enough for all of the individual components 
• 
Therefore, the stack-up of tolerances causes the parts to have poor fit resulting in 
leaks and lost parts  
 
Ok. So the root cause for the problems is the stack-up of tolerances. 
 
(the interviewer needs to lead the candidate to identify this problem which is the stack-up of 
tolerances; all the other information given initially is a red herring meant to throw the interviewee off; 
after the interviewee has identified the problem, no matter how much help he/she gets, they need to 
come up with a list of recommendations and their risks on how to solve the problem) 
 
Interviewer: So, what do you recommend them to do now? 
 
The company can reduce its warranty claims by increasing tolerances on procured parts, increasing end-
product testing, or revising procurement agreement to order sub-assemblies. The first opportunity is 
more expensive but we could look at ways to minimize costs. The second will increase mfg time but 
would definitely decrease our warranty claims.  The third option is more expensive but we could 
perform a cost-benefit analysis between the 1st and 3rd options.
