===== PDF p107 =====
18. Casual Diner (Bain) 
For many years, Jimmy Diners was a small successful chain of casual diners in the Boston metro 
area, operating primarily out of the suburbs. Two years ago, Jimmy Diners opened up four new 
locations in Boston/Cambridge near universities. The diners have been very successful, often 
with long lines of people waiting for tables. Unfortunately, these new restaurants have been less 
profitable than their suburban counte1parts. 
1'' phase: Outline a framework 
Behind the scenes: Expect the student to use a standard profitability framework. This case will 
eventually become a question about what the customers are actually buying, so a standard 
profitability framework could miss customer-specific issues. 
Interviewer: How would you approach solving this problem? 
Possible Answers: I approach the problem by breaking down the company's profits and 
considering external factors. Within profits, I would first look at revenue dtivers. I would want 
to compare the difference between the number of customers and the average dollars spent per 
customer in urban and suburban settings. Then I would take a look at cost drivers. I would start 
with variable costs (such as wait staff costs and ingredients) and then progress to fixed costs 
(such as rent). 
Externally, I would consider the differences between customers of the two types of stores. I 
would review their preferences, their purchases, the timing of their purchases, and their behavior 
at the diners. 
znd phase: Data gathering 
Behind the scenes: The inte1viewee should now ask more detailed questions about the case. 
Here are some facts to be revealed when asked for: 
• 
The quality of the two types of diners are the same (ex. Quality.ofwait staff, food, etc.) 
• 
The urban diners are in convenient locations 
• 
The basic non-food operating costs are no different between the locations (ie., Rent, 
labor, SG&A, and utilities expenses are the same per store per month). 
• 
Urban and suburban diners receive the same number of customers and each customer 
buys the same number of menu items. · 
2008-2009 Case Book 
102 


===== PDF p108 =====
Interviewer: Let's start talking about costs. What would you like to know about costs? As we go 
through them, can you create a table comparing suburban and urban store costs? 
I 
Behind the scenes: Eventually, the student should make assumptions and come up with a cost 
table (per diner per month) that looks like this: 
Suburban 
Urban 
COGS (food) 
$20,000 
$12,000 
Rent 
$8,000 
$8,000 
Labor 
$18,000 
$18,000 
SG&A 
$1,000 
$1,000 
Utilities 
$1,000 
$1,000 
Total 
$48,000 
$40,000 
Key Insight: The fact that urban store costs are less is a little surprising given we know that 
urban stores are less profitable. Thus, the revenue per urban store must be less than that of the 
suburban stores. Suburban diners must be getting more revenue per consumer. 
Interviewer: Exactly. Now Let's check this hypothesis by talking about revenues. What 
questions would you like to ask me about revenues? 
InterViewee: I would like to know how many customers go to each type of establishment, if there 
are any differences in orders, and how l!luch each customer spends. 
Interviewer: Both types of diners receive 4,000 customers. Both suburban and urban customers 
order two items during each visit, but the price per item is $7.50 for suburban customers and 
$5.00 for urban customers. 
Possible Answers: Thus, the revenue per month per store for suburban diners is $60,000 and for 
urban diners is $40,000. The profit per month is $12,000 and $0 for suburban and urban diners, 
respectively. Thus, the fact that urban customers do not order more expensive dishes causes 
urban profits to remain low. 
Interviewer: Do you think that fixed costs or variable costs are contributing to low urban store 
profitability? 
Possible Answers: The Gross Margin% is the same in each type of diner, and they have the 
same fixed cost base. Therefore, the urban diners will need to increase volume to the level of 
suburban diners to make the same overall contribution to fixed costs. 
2008-2009 Case Book 
103 
T ! 


===== PDF p109 =====
I 
3'd phase: Improvements 
Behind the scenes: This is the time to test the creativity of the student. The interviewee should 
try to stmcture his thoughts. 
Interviewer: How would you improve the perfmmance of the urban diners? 
Possible Answers: 
I would think about two things: increasing the number of customers and 
getting more out of each customer. 
Increase the number of customers - I know that we have been experiencing wait times for 
customers. I would check to see why this is occUlTing. Can we make our kitchen, wait staff, 
etc. more efficient? How long does each customer stay in the diner? 
Interviewer: Each customer stays on average for 100 minutes. We would make the kitchen move 
10% faster by employing new techniques. 
Possible Answers: Saving I 0 minutes per customer is still not going to bring us in line with the 
suburban diners. To increase the number of customers (especially when the restaurant is full), I 
would change the ambience of the restaurant to make people eat faster (for example, put on 
faster music to encourage everyone to eat more quickly). 
But I think the key thing to do would be to get more out of each customer. Through simplifying 
our menu, encouraging bundling, and raising prices, we may be able to increase revenue. 
I'd like to think more specifically about the customers. If we are serving students, their eating 
habits and level of disposable income are different than adults. We might want to change our 
hours to stay open later, tailor the menu to eating habits of students, and consider new pricing 
strategies. Simplifying our menu may eliminate low margin products and may also increase the 
efficiency of the kitchen staff. With fewer items on the menu, more preparation work could be 
done in advance. Also, we could bundle or unbundle goods. It is possible we could increase 
quantity of items sold by bundling. However, we could also investigate raising prices by selling 
French Fries separately from burgers, for example. 
Recommendation 
Interviewer: How would you conclude? 
Possible Answers: We need to improve profitability, particularly for the urban locations. I 
recommend that we adopt new techniques to improve the efficiency of kitchen staff. Driving up 
the throughput of the diners will make them more profitable. However, the suburban diners need 
to take additional steps as well. They should simplify the menu by eliminating low demand and 
low margin products. Also, the diner should consider bundling or unbundling certain products to 
increase sales. 
2008-2009 Case Book 
104 
