===== PDF p41 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
37  
5.11. Test Equipment Manufacturer 
Length: Long (30-45 Minutes) 
 
Problem: 
Your client is a manufacturer of test equipment for electronics companies.  This is a high 
complexity, low volume business, where products range from $10,000 to $1 million.  
Products are built from sets of standard subassemblies, which the manufacturer holds in 
stock.  When customers order a product, the Sales department determines customer 
requirements and configures the product using these subassemblies. 
 
Currently, the client holds 183 days worth of inventory on average.  Best-in-class 
companies hold 39 days. The client would like you to help reduce inventories to 85 days 
or less.  How would you go about achieving this? 
 
Guidelines for Building the Supply Chain: 
The candidate should begin by trying to understand the supply chain.  The following 
information can be provided as the candidate works through the supply chain model: 
1. After the order is received, the client assembles the product out of subassemblies 
and base units 
2. Subassemblies are essentially circuit boards, which are designed by the client.  
Manufacturing of these circuit boards is outsourced, with a cycle time of 
approximately 1-2 weeks 
3. Components used to manufacture subassemblies are purchased and maintained by 
the client, and sent to the outsourced manufacturer for assembly.  These 
components fall in two categories of approximately equal dollar value: 
a. A large number of “standard” off-the-shelf components are purchased 
from distributors as needed.  Lead times for standard components are 
approximately 1-2 weeks 
b. A smaller number of “custom” components are designed by the client and 
manufactured in low volumes by large semiconductor manufacturers.  
Lead times for custom components are approximately 9 months, with little 
opportunity for improvement 
4. For a typical subassembly, 33% of the cost is made up of standard components, 
33% of the cost is made up of custom components, and 33% of the cost is 
assembly at the outsourced location 
 
Additional Information: 
1. The client currently guarantees 4 weeks delivery time to the customers upon order 
receipt 
2. Inventory is comprised mainly of base units (little dollar value) and subassemblies 
(high dollar value).  Although there are only a few base units in the final offering, 
the total number of product configurations with different features and 
subassemblies is as high as 26,000 
3. Some subassemblies move very fast, while some others move slowly, and 
occasionally have to be scrapped because a new version of the product is offered 
 


===== PDF p42 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
38  
Solution: 
There is no “aha” to this case, however, the candidate is to be tested on developing an 
understanding of the supply chain, and asking the right questions to extract all the above 
information.  A few key points: 
• Has the client looked into reducing the number of subassemblies? One way to do 
this could be making subassemblies that do a large set of functions, but enabling 
only a smaller set requested and paid for by the customer.  This would allow for 
pooling of the demand and reduce its variation, which would in turn lead to lower 
inventories 
• Standard components can be procured by the outsourced manufacturer if they 
have demand for these components for their other customers.  This would reduce 
the inventory being carried by the client, again because of pooling 
• Given that the client promises 4-week delivery, it might be possible to hold 
inventory in raw components rather than subassemblies and have it manufactured 
on demand. If feasible, this could reduce the cost of inventory by one third 
