===== PDF p35 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
31
13. Preventing Katrina                             _________________  
Type of Case: Strategic thinking/non-traditional  
Difficulty: High  
   
Opening  
In August of 2005, hurricane Katrina hit the southern coast of the US, turning into the most 
economically damaging and fifth deadliest in history. The most severe loss of life and property 
damage occurred in New Orleans, which flooded as the levee system catastrophically failed. 
Eventually 80% of the city became flooded and also large tracts of neighboring parishes and the 
floodwaters lingered for weeks. Preliminary damage estimates were well in excess of $100 
billion.  
As part of an effort to prevent similar disasters in the future, the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) has approached our firm in order to develop a strategic plan to 
help prevent such impact the next time a nature phenomenon occurs.  How might you approach 
this problem?  
   
Background (Provide the following information if requested by interviewee.)  
[NOTE TO INTERVIEWER: the below information will help focus the interviewee on specific 
elements of the answer after they have had a chance to lay out their thinking above]  
• Economic assistance and funds are provided at the state and federal levels  
• FEMA usually structures their plans in four dimensions: Preparation, Response, Recovery 
 and Mitigation  
• Our project should concentrate on Mitigation; meaning how to mitigate the impact of future 
 disasters   
  Areas of Discussion  
Four major areas should be discussed:  
• Identify the risks,  
• Assess, quantify and prioritize impacts to mitigate  
• Determine plan to mitigate risk  
• Implement: Training, Communication, Raise awareness  
   
Analysis (Calculations to be completed by interviewee.)  
No calculations required  
   
Recommended Conclusion  
This is not a typical case where traditional ‘profitability’ or ‘new product’ frameworks can be 
used.  It is important not to try to force-fit the standard frameworks, but rather think about the 
problem in terms of the information you were given and the problem that needs to be solved.  
Even more than other cases, this case does not have 1 right answer; however some approaches 
have been discussed below.  
   
The first phase of the case (before interviewee has been given focus on the mitigation piece) is 
an opportunity for the interviewee to exhibit structured thinking and sound process approach, 


===== PDF p36 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
32
there is no right answer.  More important is whether the interviewee proposes a logical approach 
to the problem that covered a broad range of relevant considerations:  
   
Once the interviewee has been told to focus on Mitigation, generally their approach should 
follow a sequence along the lines of: Identify, Assess, Plan, Communicate/ implement  
     
Identify:  
• List out potential natural disasters (not only hurricanes) and risks associated with each: 
 Inventory of current state of infrastructure: levy’s, potential refugee centers (i.e. Astrodome)  
   
Assess:  
• Out of the potential disasters, consider which one is most likely and should be prioritized for 
 planning purposes.  
• Out of the risks associated with each disaster, prioritize those risks across all potential 
 disasters that have maximum risk.  
   
Plan:  
• Raise necessary funds to invest in infrastructure, communication, etc.  
• Identify key suppliers and other resources that can be mobilized in the event of emergency  
• Create a structured plan to address and communicate the risks and solutions identified  
   
Communicate:  
• Raise awareness within the general public; as well as institutions and partners: state, federal, 
 NGO’s, private companies, media, etc.  
• Use tools such as schools, media public announcements, celebrities, etc. in order to create 
 awareness  
• Establish a conference to gather, align and integrate all parties  
• Potential of using Global Warming awareness as an issue to further leverage message  
 
A Second example:  
1)      Determine the objectives and priorities of the Client (FEMA)  
a.       Reduce casualties  
b.      Reduce damage to property  
2)      Understand the various types of disasters that must be considered  
a.       Earthquate  
b.      Hurricanes  
3)      Casualties  
a.       Identify the most common causes of death and the number of people at risk  
b.      Evaluate the possible mitigating actions (prevent risk, or mitigate once risk 
comes to pass)  
c.       Implement/communicate plans  
4)      Property damage/other losses  
a.       Identify causes  
b.      Prioritize and plan  
c.       Implement/ communicate  
5)      Other considerations  


===== PDF p37 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
33
a.       Flexibility of response with changing conditions  
b.      Reliability of suppliers  
c.       Effectiveness of communication  
d.      Chain of command  
   
