===== PDF p98 =====
 
Consulting Case Interview Question 
 
Case No.: STRAT18               
Firm:    McKinsey 
Type of Case:  
Strategy 
New Product 
Introduction  
Competitive 
Response 
New Market 
Response to 
Changing Environ. 
Merger or 
Acquisition 
Other 
 
Initial Facts offered by interviewer:   
 
A major chemical producer has hired our consulting firm to evaluate another large player in 
the chemicals industry as a possible merger candidate.  Both our client and the other 
company are bulk commodity chemical producers.  Our consulting firm’s main job is to 
analyze the future prospects of the target company’s main product line: a bulk chemical that 
is used in the production of plastics. 
 
Initial data has revealed the following facts: 
• Production of this chemical has been declining slowly for several years 
• Prices have declined rapidly 
• There are 8 major producers of this chemical with market share divided the 
following way: the largest producer has a 30% share, the second largest has a 20% 
share, and our target company has a 15% share.  The rest is divided among the 
remaining 5 competitors. 
• Profitability in the industry is relatively low.  The two largest competitors earn small 
returns, our target company is breaking even, and the remaining competitors are 
operating at a small loss. 
• The largest competitor has just announced plans to substantially increase capacity. 
 
The Question(s): 
Our consulting firm has to analyze the target company’s future prospects in the product line.  
As manager of this case assignment, what information do you need to know and how would 
you structure the analysis to determine if this merger is a good idea?   
 
NOTE: At this stage in the project, our consulting firm is not in a position to make a 
recommendation, but is more interested in gathering the appropriate data.  (This is different 
from most consulting case interviews in which the purpose is to come to a 
recommendation). 
                                                                                                                                                        149 
Management Consulting Club  
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
 


===== PDF p99 =====
 
Suggested Solution 
 
Desired Framework:  [Check all that apply.] 
 
Cost-Revenue and Profitability 
 
 
The 4 P’s of Marketing 
 
The 3 C’s 
 
 
Value Chain Analysis 
X 
Porter’s 5 Forces 
 
 
Microeconomic Analysis 
 
Internal-External Factors 
 
 
Other____________________ 
 
Outline of Your Answer - Important questions asked, additional information divulged, 
assumptions, and logic:  [Walk us through how you arrived at your answer in detail.] 
 
This is an industry analysis case in which Porter’s Five Forces might be useful, but it is really an 
exercise in how to uncover the underlying drivers of the facts given in the case.  In general, the 
interviewer was more interested to see if I could ask the right data collection questions. 
 
A satisfactory response would include addressing the following issues: 
• What buyers/markets make final use of this chemical?  What is the nature of the growth and 
profitability of these end markets?  The chemical was used primarily in the automotive related industries. 
• How much production capacity exists in the industry compared to the demand today?  To the 
estimated demand in the future? Much more capacity than necessary. 
• What is the current capacity utilization in the industry?  Of our target firm?  Both the industry and 
our target firm are operating at approximately 70% capacity. 
• What is the relative cost position or our target company compared to the rest of the 
competitors?  Our target company has a reasonably good position compared to the rest of the industry in terms 
of size, age and efficiency of equipment, and financing. 
 
A good response would also include addressing the following issues: 
• Are there additional niche or value-added uses for this chemical or its by-products that are as-yet 
untapped?  Nothing really significant. 
• How rational or volatile is pricing between firms?  The industry players often engage in price cuts to 
temporarily increase market share, but usually suffer falling profitability as a result. 
• Are entry or exit costs prohibitive?  Has the number of competitors or their market share 
changed significantly in recent years?  Entry is expensive due to the unique fixed costs of producing this 
chemical, but competitors have been in this industry for a long time and many plants are fully depreciated, making 
exit inexpensive.  Market share has not changed significantly in recent years. 
• How diversified is this company and does this product represent a significant source of revenue?  
It is a significant source of revenue but most competitive producers are adequately diversified. 
 
An outstanding answer would also include the following issues: 
• Is this industry or product regulated in any way that affects cost, pricing, or profitability?  
Environmental and pollution regulation apply in the normal way to the chemical production process, but nothing 
out of the ordinary. 
150 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 


===== PDF p100 =====
 
• Are there operational improvements that the target company could make to enable it to 
be more efficient or other management expertise that our client’s company could bring 
into the merger?  Yes, on both accounts. 
• Do we know the reason for the largest competitor announcing capacity increases?  Are 
they trying to introduce a credible threat to deter future entry or expedite exit from the 
industry?  We are not sure but it could be possible. 
• Are there scale economies in production or distribution?  Yes, economies of scale exist in 
marketing and transport, but are much smaller in production. 
• Are there other synergies between our client’s company and the target company such as 
product mix, cross-selling opportunities, raw material purchase, etc?  Not significant at this 
point. 
 
There are countless paths that the analysis could flow down but these are some of the most 
obvious to consider. 
                                                                                                                                                        151 
Management Consulting Club  
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
 
