===== PDF p12 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
2. Downtown Lawn and Gardening      
 
 
Type of Case: Profitability 
 
Opening 
Your client today is “Downtown Lawn and Gardening (L&G)”. They are a consumer packaged 
goods company which manufactures lawn and garden consumable products such as lawn and 
plant fertilizers, grass seeds, and weed and insect control products. This accounts for a majority 
of the business and is $1.9 B of their $2.7 B annual sales. They also have other divisions in the 
outdoor living category such as professional lawn services and retail stores with outdoor 
furniture, garden tools, and accessories, which earns the remaining revenue.  Downtown L&G 
has seen their profitability in the CPG business decline and has approached you to find out why 
and recommend a solution. 
 
Bonus Question (for the star candidate who completes the case on time): 
Downtown L&G is a publicly traded company that has promised top-line growth in the near 
term to its Wall Street investors. How can the company achieve this? 
 
 
Areas of Discussion 
 
Industry Landscape 
• This product category is mature with growth of 4% per year. (This is important to 
understand the source of declining profitability.) 
• Downtown L&G is the market leader, with about 61% market share on average across 
their categories.   
• The other two big players in the market are Midtown L&G and Uptown L&G.  
• Some additional smaller players exist. 
 
Competition 1: Midtown L&G 
• Annual Sales:  $800 MM 
• Market Share: (Candidate can calculate this)  ~26% 
• Other information: 
o Products: The majority of their business is in producing private label or 
exclusive lines for Home Depot, Lowe’s and Wal-Mart.  They are a lower-cost 
producer of value products. 
 
Competition 2: Uptown L&G 
• Annual Sales:  $500 MM 
• Market Share: (Candidate can calculate this)  ~16% 
• Other information: 
o Products: Strong in grass seed segment. 
o Region: Primarily in the South. 
 
 
7 


===== PDF p13 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
2. Downtown Lawn and Gardening continued…  
 
 
Retail Distribution Channels 
• 75% of CPG sales are through Home Depot, Wal-Mart, and Lowe’s 
• Remaining 25% of sales are through what are called independent stores: hardware 
stores, nursery centers, regional chain mass merchant stores, and grocery and drug 
stores.  
• Do you have any information about product sales or trends at Home Depot? 
While retail sales continue to be up slightly at Home Depot, wholesale sales have 
been flat to declining because they had built up excessive inventory and are now 
unloading that before purchasing more.  This is expected to continue in 2008. 
• Do you have any information about product sales or trends at Lowe’s? 
Sales are increasing quickly at Lowe’s, mostly following their store expansion and 
also due to more of the client’s products being sold there. 
• Do you have any information about product sales or trends at Wal-Mart? 
Sales at Wal-Mart are growing, but slower than the growth we estimate for the 
overall market. 
• Do you have any information about product sales or trends at Independent Retailers? 
Sales at independents are growing, slightly, even though these outlets are losing 
market share to Home Depot, Lowe’s, and Wal-Mart overall.  This growth is due to 
the optimization of the go-to-market approach (selling direct to bigger accounts and 
going to distributor in others, with a pay-for-performance incentive for distributors). 
 
Product Customer 
• Consumers who buy the client’s products are traditionally male, but increasingly 
female or the purchases are influenced by females. 
• They are predominantly home owners. 
 
Company: Downtown L&G 
• Annual Sales:  $1.9 B 
• Market Share: 61% 
 
• Revenue: Has been increasing over the past few years. 
• Price: Increased for the first time in a few years on the premium product segment. 
• Volume: Total product sales have increased. 
• Costs: 
o Variable Costs: Have increased due to increases in raw material costs and 
freight. Downtown L&G has been able to pass these along to the Premium 
product. 
o Fixed Costs: Have stayed constant. 
 
• Distribution Regions: Stronger in the Northeast and Midwest because their core 
products align with the climate and growing conditions in this region. Downtown L&G 
has been expanding product line to offer products suited specifically for other regions 
as well. 
8 


===== PDF p14 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
2. Downtown Lawn and Gardening continued…  
 
 
• Advertising: Advertises significantly to educate consumers on the importance of the 
product category. 
• Benefits due to scale: Bargaining power with retailers to influence on display and 
promotion space. Savings due to efficiencies in supply chain. 
 
• Products: Downtown L&G has two main segments. 
a. Premium Products: This has been their core business for a while. Downtown 
L&G is known as a high quality producer and leads the industry in innovation. 
b. Private Label Products: Downtown L&G recently launched a number of new 
private label or exclusive products at the request of retailers. (If asked what a 
Private Label is, it is a store branded product.) 
 
• Has the Private Label product cannibalized the Premium product? 
No it hasn’t. 
• How has volume grown for the individual product lines? 
The Private Label product has grown volume. Premium brand has stayed constant 
and has not been cannibalized by Private Label. 
• Why sell Downtown L&G Private Label brands? (The Interviewer should present the 
information below one bullet at a time; at that point the interviewee should challenge 
that and ask for further rationalization which would prompt the interviewer to reveal 
the next reason) 
o Downtown L&G makes private label brands because the retailers have 
requested it, in order to differentiate themselves from their competitors and 
reduce pricing pressure. 
o Downtown L&G wants to take existing business from competitors such as 
Midtown L&G, and also prevent them from gaining new business in the 
industry. 
o Downtown L&G hopes to use these products to negotiate other benefits such as 
additional control of the inventory process (with advance orders and better 
forecasting, Downtown L&G can reduce costs for themselves as well as the 
retailers. However, retailers are often reluctant to turn this over). 
• Do the Private Label and Premium Brand products share the same cost 
structure/manufacturing processes? 
No. The Private Label is sourced to a third party who is able to produce the 
products at a much lower costs than Downtown L&G. This affects costs for the 
Premium brand product because Downtown L&G frees up more excess capacity 
and is unable to utilize supply chain efficiencies and scale economies. 
• Are margins the same across both product segments? 
No. The Private Label products earn a lower margin than the premium products 
because Downtown L&G has to give their clients, the retailers, a greater portion of 
the margin. 
 
 
9 


===== PDF p15 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
2. Downtown Lawn and Gardening continued…  
 
• How are product sales teams structured? How are they incentivized? 
Product sales teams are divided into client-specific business development teams, 
and are incentivized on meeting aggressive top line growth targets (which are set 
significantly above the product category market growth rate). Sales of the Private 
Label products help the sales teams achieve these targets. 
 
 
Case Takeaways: 
• Interviewer Question: What is the source of declining profitability? 
Top-line has been increased, while the overall product margin has decreased over 
the years. This is the root cause of the decline in profitability. 
• Interviewer Question: What can you say about Downtown L&G’s decision to enter the 
Private Label product market? 
When the benefits are quantified and considered against costs, Downtown L&G is 
giving up more than they are gaining. This has been happening because they have 
been introducing these lower margin private label or exclusive lines, with little real 
justification. 
 
 
Recommended Conclusion 
Potential solutions to declining profitability: 
o Change incentives for product sales teams to be weighted in terms of product margin. 
o Require more rigorous study of the economics of private label/exclusive brand plays 
before making the commitment to the customer—all “strategic” benefits should be 
quantified 
o There is an inevitable tradeoff between revenue growth and margin. Identify which is 
more important, top-line growth for Wall Street or the ultimate bottom-line? Potentially 
abandon private label business to restore margins. 
 
Recommendations for Bonus Question: Increase top-line Revenue by: 
o The client can leverage its strength in R&D to innovate in new areas such as effective 
and budget-friendly organics 
o The client can gain top line growth by encouraging more frequent usage of products 
 
 
10 
