===== PDF p82 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
78 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Your client designs, manufactures, and markets a full line of bicycles.  The company’s sales and 
profits had been growing until three years ago when its profitability flattened and began 
declining.  Why did this happen and how can the client fix the problem? 
 
We’ll start by examining elements of the profit equation: 
Profit = (Price x Volume) – Costs 
 
I’d like to assess whether revenues (price x volume), expenses, or both are the source of 
decreasing profits.  Can you tell me how much revenues and expenses have been increasing or 
decreasing? 
 
!"Revenues are growing roughly at the same rate as before the downturn.  Expenses are 
increasing disproportionately, however. 
 
So we need to determine the source of increasing expenses.  Are cost increases due to operating 
or administrative activities? 
 
!"Administrative costs are growing, but operating costs appear to account for the bulk of 
increased expenses. 
 
Which components of operating costs – fixed or variable – are increasing? 
 
!"Fixed costs are growing but variable costs appear to account for the bulk of increased 
expenses. 
 
Which components of variable cost – direct or indirect – have been increasing? 
 
!"Both have been growing, bicycles have become more sophisticated, with better materials and 
components.  However, the increasing cost per bike has been comparable to the growing 
price/revenue per bike.  Indirect costs are increasing disproportionately. 
 
Which components of indirect variable costs are responsible – materials or labor? 
 
!"Allocations of indirect materials are about the same (usage per bike has remained about the 
same).  However, allocation of indirect labor appears to be the big problem. 
 
Why are indirect labor costs increasing?  It must be that laborers are spending more time on 
activities not directly related to the manufacture of a bicycle (or maybe sitting idle more).  Are 
there bottlenecks in the system?  In other words, has work-in-progress inventory been increasing? 


===== PDF p83 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
79 
 
!"Yes it has.  When you look at the factory floor, you see many bikes waiting around.  What do 
you think the bottlenecks result from? 
 
It could be from capacity constraints. 
 
!"No, it’s not capacity related – there’s plenty of throughput available.  However, much time 
appears to be spent nowadays in setup-resetting paint booths, welding jigs, dies and presses, 
etc.  Why do you think this has occurred? 
 
Increased setup time can result from either an increasing number of setups per bike or increasing 
time per setup.  Has time per setup increased? 
 
!"No, it has actually decreased as workforce has improved setup tools, jigs, etc.  In addition, 
workforce turnover and labor relations are all fine. 
 
Then the problem must be the result of increased setups.  That would make sense since you said 
earlier that bikes have been getting more sophisticated with better materials.  There are probably 
more material options for bike buyers to choose from, forcing manufacturers to produce a greater 
of bike varieties.  This would cause an increase in the number of manufacturing setups that were 
required. 
 
!"That’s correct.  In addition, at the time of profit decline the industry was trending towards 
increased specialization in bicycles: touring/mountain/racing/hybrid/etc.  This company had 
responded with rapidly proliferating product lines, leading to increased number of setups 
and lower volume per assembly run.  What are some things the company can do to try to 
alleviate this problem? 
 
They could try to rationalize product lines, and try to increase shared components across model 
lines.  Also, greater volume on each production run may yield better results. 
 
!"Good job. 
 
NOTE: The key to this case is methodically dissecting the cost structure for the company, and 
knowing what the components of cost are (i.e. cost accounting). 
