===== PDF p165 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
161 
 
38. Marlin Toys (Parthenon R2, CPG/Retail, M&A, Balanced) 
Stem: Your client is a large toy manufacturer named “Marlin” (think of a company such as Hasbro or 
Mattel) with $3B in sales. They are interested in potentially acquiring a smaller company named “Dolphin” 
which sells educational toys. 
 
Dolphin is different from Marlin since it employs a direct selling model. They hire independent contractors 
(ICs) to sell their toys for them: these ICs find people to hold parties for them, and invite about 8-10 
people whom they sell these toys to. The ICs are paid 20% commission. If the ICs refer a friend to sell 
Dolphin products and does so, that sale still generates 20% commission for the new IC, but also an 
additional, smaller commission for the person who originally referred him. This process continues and you 
get an increasingly smaller cut of sales from members that were referred by those you referred, etc. This 
“down-stream” sums up to approximately 10% commission total. 
 
Dolphin has been losing revenues lately. Two years ago, they had $35M in revenue, one year ago they 
had $28M, and this year they have $20M. This year they are operating at zero profitability - breakeven. 
 
Although the cost of the acquisition is not significant due to their relative sizes, Marlin wants to have a 
company that can pay its own way. Two questions: 
 
1. What do both parties have to gain from this acquisition? 
2. Why is Dolphin losing revenues and what can it do about it? 
 
One example structure is to include the following buckets for question 1: revenue synergies, cost 
synergies, Marlin itself, and the educational toy industry; and the following buckets for question 2: 
external vs. internal factors or decrease in price vs. decrease in quantity. Candidate should ultimately 
recognize question 2 as higher priority. 
 
The following information can be given when asked for by the Candidate: 
 
● 
The educational toy market is growing at a rate of 3%; overall toy market is flat 
● 
Dolphin is the only company currently selling educational toys with direct sales method 
● 
There were no recent competitor entries in educational toys 
● 
Other educational toys are sold through retailers such as Target and Walmart 
● 
Marlin does not have any educational toys now, but other large toy manufacturers do 
 
Interviewer: Why might Dolphin be losing revenue? 
Candidate: Perhaps Dolphin has reached market saturation, they have old or under-preferred products, 
their prices are too high, or the sales force isn’t big enough or effective. 
 
Interviewer: Good thoughts, but Dolphin products are actually in high demand, and while they do sell at a 
premium price, people are willing to pay it. In fact, many people have been complaining that they cannot 
find a party when they want to. This is because recently the number of ICs has been declining at a rate of 
10%. Dolphin is proactively adding IC’s, but more ICs are leaving than joining. Average party revenue has 
remained constant at $200. 
Candidate: Dolphin’s decline in revenue is not an external factor since the market is growing. There is 
demand for this product, but it is not being sufficiently distributed. We know that IC’s are declining at a 
rate of 10%, but this does not account for the total decline in revenue (which is > 20% per year). Since 
revenue per party is constant, each IC must be putting on less parties. 
 
Interviewer: Why might each IC hold less parties than before? 


===== PDF p166 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
162 
 
Candidate: Their compensation may not be using proper incentives or they may be having a hard time 
finding the right areas to hold their parties. 
 
Interviewer: Correct, as I mentioned, Dolphin parties generate $200 on average. The IC commission rate 
is 20%, so $40 per party. Industry average (similar job functions) is 30% with party revenue of $300, so 
$90 per party. These sellers may pursue multiple jobs and prefer to hold parties for products other than 
Dolphin. Management believes that by increasing commission rate to 30% but maintaining the 
“downstream” rate, the number of parties will double. Assume these parties still have $200 sales on 
average. Will this solve their company’s problems? 
Candidate: The increase in commission will lead to $60 per party for the IC which, granted, is 1.5x more 
than they’re currently getting with Dolphin, but is still considerably less than the $90 ICs get with 
competitors. I think the expectation that the number of parties will double is a little aggressive, but I’m 
happy to run the numbers. Can you tell me about the current cost structure? 
 
Interviewer: COGS = 50%, Fixed Costs = 20%, Selling Cost = commission + “downstream” 
 
The candidate should create the following chart: 
 
 
Candidate: Increasing the commission rate to 30% gives us no difference in profitability, and the doubling 
of parties held seems unlikely. Perhaps we can increase commission further to determine impact on 
profitability or explore other distribution channels. 
 
Interviewer: How do you think Marlin and Dolphin can help each other in this respect (i.e. revisit Question 
1)? 
 
Candidate: 
In terms of revenue synergies, Dolphin will benefit from using Marlin’s current store 
locations and distribution channels. Because Dolphin products are in high demand, they should do well in 
stores. This will bring in additional revenue and help solve the profitability problem for Dolphin as a stand- 
alone business. Marlin can gain brand desirability and increased sales by adding educational toys to its 
product line and exposing Dolphin’s education customers to its other products. The acquisition would 
ultimately improve Marlin’s competitive position relative to other large toy manufacturers. In terms of cost 
synergies, most toys are made from similar physical materials, so an acquisition should allow both 
companies to enjoy economies of scale by decreasing raw materials costs, sharing manufacturing 
facilities, and streamlining operations. 
 
Interviewer: OK, thank you. 
 
No formal recommendation was required for this case 
Before 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
