===== PDF p136 =====
Industry: Healthcare
Quantitative Level: Not applicable
Qualitative Level: Medium
FoodXperts (Human Capital)
132


===== PDF p137 =====
Behavioral Questions
133
• Why are you interested in Human Capital consulting?
– The candidate should emphasize why they are drawn to HC consulting (likely with Deloitte) 
rather than S&O or Tech.  They should emphasize past work experience, or interests peaked 
in business school in working specifically on people related problems.
Question 1:
• What city do you want to be in and why?
– Interviewee should have good reasons for targeting specific city/office:
•
Personal connections to city: family/friends
•
Talked with people from specific office and feel like it is a good fit
•
Industry interests specific to office
Question 2:


===== PDF p138 =====
FoodXperts
• Your client CARE FIRST (CF) is a large hospital system, comprising 100 acute 
general medicine hospitals across the US employing over 200,000 people 
nationwide.  CF’s patient mix are covered by a variety of insurance providers, 
however, the majority of patients are covered by Medicare and Medicaid.  In the last 
five years, CF has acquired 70 hospitals in rural regions, increasing the number of 
patients it serves by 40%.  For the last 10 years, CF has been outsourcing their 
foodservice needs to one contract vendor, FoodXperts. FoodXperts handles all in-
room patient dining, cafeteria, retail dining and employs all staff and management as 
they relate to foodservice in CF’s hospitals.
• Due to policy changes and emphasis on value based care, patient satisfaction, 
measured through HCAHPS scores, is now factored into hospital reimbursement 
rates from Medicare and Medicaid.  CF has recently seen a decline in their 
reimbursement rates and believes it may be due to the low quality food and service 
that FoodXperts has been providing.  CF has decided to end their contract with 
FoodXperts at the end of the next year and to begin self-operating foodservices on 
their own.  By making this shift, CF will have to replace all staff and management that 
has been employed by FoodXperts.
• CF is worried that CEO’s at individual hospitals will not be invested in this decision 
and will likely push back to keep outsourcing foodservice at their individual hospitals.  
Prompt:
134


===== PDF p139 =====
FoodXperts
• CF has asked your team to help them in planning for the transition to self-operating 
foodservices across the entire hospital system and replacing FoodXperts
management and staff.  How would you assist CF through this large scale change?
• Guiding Questions: 
– Who are the stakeholders involved? 
– What phases would you propose to roll out this transition to self-operate 
foodservice?
– What are the anticipated challenges you foresee?
Prompt (continued):
• This case is meant to mimic a typical Deloitte human capital case with a longer 
prompt and includes more information than necessary.  Make sure to read the 
prompt at a normal pace so that the candidate can practice taking quick abbreviated 
notes. 
• Different than strategy cases, the candidate should summarize the prompt telling you 
the “story” and problem facing the client.
• Human capital cases are meant to be conversational, after reviewing the prompt and 
asking follow up questions, the candidate should take a few minutes to framework 
their thoughts before beginning their explanation.
Interviewer Guidance:
135


===== PDF p140 =====
FoodXperts
• What is CF’s organization structure?
– CF headquarters is located in New York and has hospitals across the US in both rural and 
urban areas.  Most decisions are made centrally at headquarters but CEO’s of individual 
hospitals have some flexibility to modify plans if they can prove that it will be better for their 
patients overall.
• How many FTE are employed by FoodXperts?
– 5% of employees at CF are currently under FoodXperts management and would leave at the 
end of the contract. 
•
Candidate should know there are 200K employees and therefore know CF will need to 
hire 10K people across all of their hospitals.
• Has CF ever done something like this in the past?
– Yes, CF used to outsource healthcare technology to another vendor and decided to self-
operate this division a few years ago.  The decision was abrupt and they lost a lot of great 
talent from the current vendor (that might have stayed on) due to poor messaging from 
leadership.  Some CEO’s of individual hospitals disagreed with the decision and have been 
weary of other changes mandated from headquarters.  
• Why is this change taking place?  What are the main objectives of this change?
– The candidate should have this information from the prompt and should emphasize these in 
their explanation. If not: the change is happening because of declining patient satisfaction 
scores and thus lower reimbursement from Medicare and Medicaid.  The main objective is 
have a smooth transition to self-operating foodservice in an effort to increase patient 
satisfaction and reimbursement rates across the system. 
Additional Information (if requested):
136


===== PDF p141 =====
FoodXperts
Candidate can use assess, design, deploy framework.  Candidate may have some but 
not all listed below in their framework. 3-4 workstreams are suggested for timing 
purposes.
• Assess
– Stakeholder Analysis: Conduct a stakeholder analysis to identify key stakeholders at each 
individual hospital: CEO’s/Foodservice managers, FoodXpert staff/management that might be 
retained after contract is terminated.
– Change Impact Assessment: Conduct a change impact analysis (i.e. a forum for those 
impacted stakeholders) to identify concerns about the self-operating foodservice, especially 
those that might come from the recent healthcare technology change.  Document all 
procedural changes that will need to be addressed via hiring and communications.
• Design: 
– Hiring plan: Work with hospital CEO/Foodservice managers to create plan to retain 
management and staff currently employed by FoodXperts. Develop plan with central HR to fill 
remaining gaps at hospital level.  
– Communications: Design a communications plan documenting all communications that will be 
delivered to stakeholders. This plan should outline what group of stakeholders should receive 
what message, the frequency of the communications, the vehicle of communication and the 
due date. 
– Learning & Development: plan for the integration of new employees to include onboarding, 
training, and future development needs.
Recommendation 
137


===== PDF p142 =====
FoodXperts
• Design (continued):
– Change Management: For such a large-scale change, it would be advantageous to create a 
Change Agent Network made up of “change agents/champions” who will lead the new 
structure of foodservice operations and can be subject matter experts on the new system to 
self-operate foodservice and be the main point of contact that hospitals can go to with 
questions and concerns. The Change Agent Network would meet several times before the 
contract with FoodXperts is terminated to manage transition to self-operating foodservice and 
get the opportunity to answer any questions or address any concerns arising from colleagues.
• Deploy:
– Hiring: Roll out hiring plan from central office and assist CEOs in retaining high quality talent 
from FoodXperts (especially hospitals located in rural regions where talent might be more 
scarce). 
– Communications: Execute on the first communications that are meant to build awareness and 
investment from CEO’s at hospital level. Work with CEOs to deploy messaging to FoodXperts
staff/management that they want to be retained. 
– Change Management: Facilitate Change Network Meetings and inform all employees that the 
change agents will be the go-to people for questions regarding the change in foodservice so 
that management can carry on with day-to-day activities. 
• Note: candidate may want to have a trial run with small set of hospitals early on in the process to 
gather information and learn from the transition prior to rolling out to the entire system.
Recommendation (continued): 
138
