===== PDF p19 =====
 
15 
C O N S U L T I N G  C A S E  I N T E R VI E W  
Organ Donation Case (McKinsey like) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Level of Difficulty 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p20 =====
 
16 
Note:  This case is typical of a McKinsey structured case interview (though it is not a 
real McKinsey case).  The interviewer should drive the discussion through the five 
sections below.  Bold text indicates instructions for the interviewer.  The interviewer 
should thoroughly review this document before giving the case. 
 
Case Setup  
 
One of the many functions of the New York State Health Commission is to coordinate 
organ donation amongst the state’s many hospitals.  In recent years the demand for 
organs has been greater than the supply.  As a result, many patients die each year because 
there are not enough organ donations.  The Health Commission has hired McKinsey to 
help it determine how to increase the number of annual organ donations in New York.  
For the purposes of this case, assume that only New York residents are involved as 
donors and recipients. 
 
Question 1 
 
What are the factors and drivers that determine the number of organs donated in New 
York each year? 
 
Note:  The candidate should ask clarifying questions at this point and should feel 
free to take a minute to construct a response.  The following information should be 
given either when asked for or when the candidate gets stuck. 
Information:  In New York, organs will be harvested from terminally ill or 
injured patients just before death only if they are a registered organ donor or 
if the hospital receives permission from the next of kin.  New York residents 
may choose to register as organ donors when they apply for a driver’s 
license.   
 
Sample answer:   
 
(Terminal patients*% Registered donors *organs/donor) + (Terminal patients*% 
Not registered*% Family consent*organs/donor) = organs donated 
 
“The number of organs donated is determined by the number of terminal patients times 
the percent who are registered donors times the number of organs per person, plus the 
number of terminal patients times the percent that are not registered donors times the rate 
of family consent times the number of organs per person. 
 
“The number of terminal patients is driven by the age of the population, changes in life 
spans, medical technology, the size of the population, the overall rate of natural death, 
plus the rate of accidental death, such as car accidents.  The percentage of registered 
donors is driven by awareness of the donor program, the ease of registering, whether it is 
opt-in or opt-out, awareness of the benefits of organ donation and personal things such as 
religious beliefs.  The rate of family consent is also driven by awareness of the benefits of 
organ donation and things such as religious beliefs, along with the information provided 


===== PDF p21 =====
 
17 
by doctors in a time of great grief and assurance that organs will only be harvested after 
death is certain.  The number of organs donated per person is driven by the average 
number of healthy, usable organs in a donor.   
 
While we’ve identified a number of factors, it’s important to note that we can only really 
influence the rate of registered donors and the rate of family consent.” 
 
Note:  This question seeks to test a candidate’s breadth of thinking.  A good answer 
will be logical and structured.  It will examine the factors as an equation, though not 
necessarily exactly as presented here.  It will be thorough and should include 3-4 
drivers for each factor.  A great answer examines the implications of the analysis – 
ie.  There are only two factors that we can influence. 
 
Question 2 
 
The team has decided to focus on increasing the number of registered donors and is 
specifically interested in kidneys donations.  The Health Commission knows that it needs 
9,200 kidneys per year.  What percent of New Yorkers need to be registered donors in 
order for 9,200 kidneys to be donated in a year? 
 
The team has already collected some useful information: 
The population of New York is 10 million.  The percentage of people that become 
terminally ill or injured each year is .1% (one-tenth of one percent).  The 
percentage of families that give consent to harvest organs is 10%.   
 
Sample answer:  The candidate should setup and solve the following equation. 
 
RD = Percent of New Yorkers who are registered donors. 
 
(10,000,000*.001*RD) + (10,000,000*.001*.1*(1-RD)) = 4,600 
(10,000*RD) + (1,000*(1-RD)) = 4,600 
10,000RD+1,000-1,000RD = 4,600 
9,000RD=3,600 
RD=3,600/9,000 
RD=.4=40% 
 
Note:  Set the equation equal to 4,600 because there are two kidneys per person.  
4,600*2=9,200. 
 
Note:  There are other possible ways to setup the equation.  What’s important is 
that the candidate takes a structured, analytical approach to the problem and 
doesn’t panic.  The candidate should walk the interviewer through the math, either 
as she solves the equation or afterwards.  If the candidate gets stuck, give 
appropriate hints.   
 


===== PDF p22 =====
 
18 
A great answer will include implications of the data.  For example, they may 
conclude that 40% seems reasonable based on their personal experiences knowing 
people who are registered donors.  Anything to show initiative and critical thinking 
without prompting is good. 
 
Question 3 
 
What are all of the things that the Health Commission should consider doing to increase 
the number of registered donors? 
 
 
Sample answer: “First, we should conduct benchmarking studies.  Internal benchmarking 
will reveal what they are currently doing well to drive registrations, and external 
benchmarking of other states or countries will uncover new ways to increase 
registrations.  Second, we should conduct a segmentation of current and prospective 
registrants.  We’ll want to determine the segments where we are strong so we can 
continue to cultivate them, and at the same time find new segments where few people are 
registering.  Third, we should conduct a series of marketing communication tests to 
determine appropriate messaging and channels to increase awareness and drive 
registrations.  We should consider testing media such as TV, radio, online, direct mail, 
and may also be able to leverage the word of mouth of our current customers.  We’ll also 
want to develop messaging that increases the awareness of the donor program, the 
benefits of donation and the safeguards that are in place.  Finally, we need to optimize 
our distribution channels.  Currently, people can only register when they get their driver’s 
license.  We should add ways to register, such as any time someone goes to the doctor or 
hospital.  We should also make it easier to register.  For example, if New York currently 
requires people to explicitly opt-in, we can change to an automatic opt-in with an explicit 
opt-out.   
 
Note:  This question is designed to evaluate the candidate’s depth of thinking.  The 
above plan is a sample only and there are other approaches.  A good plan will be 
MECE, with discrete categories (ie.  “Benchmarking”) and multiple items within 
each category.  The plan should demonstrate common sense and sound business 
judgment. 
 
Question 4 
 
The team conducted a customer segmentation and your Engagement Manager has asked 
you to draw some initial conclusions from the data (give candidate the data handout from 
the end of the case – candidate should clarify that the data are in millions of people).  
What would you tell her?  Follow up question:  Which segment represents the best 
opportunity to increase RDs? 
 
Sample answer:  “It looks like the Caucasian segment has the largest number of potential 
new registrants, but at the same time is already highly penetrated.  The African-American 
segment is the opposite:  low-penetration but low upside.  The Hispanic segment has a 
slightly higher penetration than African-American, but is a bigger population.  Based on 


===== PDF p23 =====
 
19 
this data alone, I would target the Hispanic segment because of the low current 
penetration and large population.  Some of the risks include overcoming the language 
barrier and dealing with cultural differences.” 
 
Note:  The data table is designed to present the Caucasian, African-American and 
Hispanic segments as strong possible targets for different reasons.  The candidate 
should reason through the pros/cons of targeting each segment and come to a firm 
hypothesis based on this data.  It’s more important that the candidate selects a 
target for good reasons and less important that she selects Hispanic. 
 
Question 5 
 
The team has decided to focus on increasing the registration rate among Hispanics.  What 
are some things we can do to increase registrations of Hispanics?? 
 
Note:  This question is designed to test a candidate’s creativity.  Hence, a sample 
answer is not provided.  It is likely that the candidate will suggest things such as 
community outreach, Spanish language marketing materials/registration, etc., 
classic consumer marketing tactics, having vans drive around Hispanic communities 
encouraging people to register, etc.  A good answer will have a long list of ideas that 
include typical business tactics along with creative, interesting suggestions.  The 
interview should push the candidate by repeatedly asking “What else?”, until the 
candidate can no longer think of things, and to determine how they respond to 
pressure. 
 
Question 6 
 
The head of the Health Commission just walked in and wants a recommendation for what 
he should do to quickly reach Hispanics.  What’s your recommendation?  Start talking 
now. 
Sample answer:  “Clearly, there is a big opportunity with Hispanics.  We’ve identified a 
number of things we can do to increase registrations, and since we’re focused on the short 
term, I recommend that we do X, Y, and Z, because of A and B.” 
 
Note:  A good answer should be short (20 seconds), organized and forceful.  The 
candidate should be firm and not hedge her answer.  The recommended steps will 
likely be things discussed in Question 4, and a good answer will choose tactics that, 
logically, will make the biggest impact. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p24 =====
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Handout 
 
Registered Donors(M) 
Population(M) 
Caucasian 
2.600 
5.500 
African-American 
0.075 
1.500 
Hispanic 
0.250 
2.500 
Other 
0.100 
0.500 
 
 
 
 
