===== PDF p42 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
38 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Easy 
Company: BCG 
 
9.7 China Outsourcing 
Problem set-up 
The client is a national manufacturer of plastic consumer products 
that are sold in a variety of retail formats, including supermarkets, 
discounters, club stores, and dollar stores. The company has 
three main product lines: 1) freezer bags, 2)  plastic plates  and 
utensils, and 3) specialty plates and utensils. 
 
The CEO has been reading for some time about American 
companies outsourcing their production overseas to low-cost 
countries such as China. She wonders whether this makes sense 
for her company as well. It worries her that none of her main 
competitors have established foreign  production  capabilities;  on 
the other hand, this could be a tremendous opportunity to gain a 
competitive advantage. 
We have been asked to help the client understand the benefits 
and risks of moving its production capabilities to China and to 
provide a recommendation. 
 
Question and Facts 
 
1. Freezer bags 
Plastic bags are used mainly to store food items in freezers. 
According to customers, top purchase criterion is quality, since low 
quality bags will result in food spoilage. Client is #3 in category, 
with 200 million lbs. sold. The category leader has a strong brand 
and strong innovation. 
 
2. Plastic plates and utensils 
Disposable plates and utensils; intended for single/limited use. 
According to customers, top purchase criterion is price. Client    is 
#2 in category, with 300 million lbs. sold. Client is at cost parity 
with category leader but has a weaker brand. 
 
3. Specialty plates and utensils 
Plastic plates and utensils produced for specific retailers, 
customized to their design specs. According to customers, top 
purchase criterion is  style/design.  Because  many  products  are 
new and untested, demand is highly variable. Client is #1    in 
category, with 100 million lbs. sold. No strong competitors. 
 
4. Current client production capabilities 
All products are made in a single factory in  Ohio. The factory is 
at capacity and the company is considering building or acquiring a 
nearby facility. 
 
5. Chinese production options 
Client has no  previous  experience  in  building  and  managing a 
factory overseas. Client has met with several Chinese 
manufacturing  partners  and  has  done  initial  product  testing. 
 
 
All three product lines have similar cost structures and savings 
(Exhibit 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quality: lower quality on freezer bags, equal quality on plastic 
plates and utensils (both regular and specialty). 
 
Lead time: need 3-4 weeks of additional lead time for each product 
line for transportation from China to U.S. distribution center. 
 
6. Chinese market, current client presence 
All three categories are relatively underdeveloped but growing, 
dominated by local manufacturers. Client does not currently  have 
any sales in China, although a few of their U.S. customers (e.g., 
Wal-Mart) do have presence there. 
 
Framework and Analysis 
The candidate should start with a brief overview of the potential 
benefits and risks of outsourcing to China. The main benefit is lower 
costs, mostly driven by inexpensive labor. A secondary benefit   is 
a possible springboard into the emerging Chinese (and other 
Asian) market. Risks include lower labor productivity, possible 
quality issues, longer lead times, additional transportation costs, 
and potential communication/coordination issues. The candidate 
can be asked about the ramifications of longer lead times – they 
include greater carrying costs, higher cycle and safety stock, 
greater forecast error, and less responsiveness to demand. 
 
There are three main questions asked to the candidate: How much 
cheaper is producing in China? 
What do consumers value and how would outsourcing affect those 
criteria? 
What are the client’s current production capabilities and how would 
outsourcing part/all of their production affect the remainder? 
 
First, the candidate should size the opportunity – is this a $5 million 
or a $500 million opportunity? By solving for the last column in 
Exhibit 1, the candidate will find that the client would save $0.25/ 
lb. (25% of current costs) by outsourcing to China. Given current 
production levels, the client would save $50 million by outsourcing 
freezer bags, $75 million by outsourcing plastic plates and utensils, 
and $25 million by outsourcing specialty plates and  utensils. Two 
notes: 1) costs may increase if the Chinese Yuan rises versus the 
dollar and 2) these estimates do not include a profit margin for the 
Chinese outsourcing partner. 
 
The candidate should also recognize that cost savings alone are 
not sufficient to make a decision. It is important to understand how 
an outsourced product will affect sales. The candidate should 
suggest market research to understand consumer behavior. 
 
Freezer bags: since customers’ top purchase criterion is quality 
and outsourcing would produce lower quality bags, the candidate 
should raise a red flag here. A more sophisticated recommendation 
would be to conduct market research to see the impact on sales of 
the lower quality bag at lower prices – even though quality 


===== PDF p43 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is more important than price, the magnitude of a price change may 
override the drop in product quality. 
 
Plastic plates and utensils: the top purchase criterion here      is 
price, which makes this product line an attractive outsourcing 
opportunity. The candidate can be asked what the client should 
do with the cost savings – potential recommendations include 
dropping price to steal share, investing to defend its position      in 
case competitors begin outsourcing (e.g., brand, innovation, 
customer service), and milking the product line as a cash cow. 
 
Specialty plates and utensils: the highly variable and unpre- 
dictable demand for these products means that shorter lead times 
are critical in order to adjust production quickly. Longer lead times 
will result in greater forecast errors, higher safety/cycle stock, and   
more   unsold   inventory   and/or   out-of-stocks. Therefore, 
specialty plates and utensils should not be outsourced. 
An analysis of customer purchase behavior indicates that plastic 
plates and utensils  should  be  outsourced,  specialty  plates  and 
utensils should not be, and freezer bags probably should  not be. 
The final step is to understand the impact of outsourcing on the 
client’s current production capabilities. For example, will it lead to 
plant closings (resulting in closing costs and possible negative 
publicity)? Will it lead to underutilization of current facilities? 
 
Since the current plant is already near capacity, moving plastic 
plates and utensils offshore would actually save the client from 
investing in new facilities. However, since that product line makes 
up 50% of total production (in terms of lbs.), removing it may create 
too much extra capacity in the current plant for the two remaining 
lines. To compensate, the client could produce a new product line, 
rent out the extra capacity, or move to a smaller plant. 
 
 
 
CHINA OUTSOURCING OPPORTUNITY 
EXHIBIT 1 
 
Costs 
Costs in 
U.S. ($/lb.) 
Costs in China 
relative to U.S. 
Costs in 
China ($/lb.) 
Labor 
0.30 
8% of wage rate 
8% of productivity 
Material 
• 
Plastic resin 
0.30 
80% 
• 
Other material (incl. packaging) 
0.20 
75% 
Variable overhead 
140% 
Transportation 
• 
China to U.S. distribution center 
N/A 
$6K to ship 40K lbs. 
• 
U.S. distribution center to customer 
0.05 
Same 
Total 
1.00 


===== PDF p44 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA OUTSOURCING OPPORTUNITY 
SAMPLE APPROACH 
 
 
 
 
 
Should plastics manufacturer move production to China? 
Main question 
Key areas 
to explore 
Cost savings 
• 
Would save $0.25/lb. 
(25% of current costs) 
• 
At current production levels, 
would save: 
- $50M in freezer bags 
- $75M in plastic plates 
and utensils 
- $25M in specialty 
plates and utensils 
Consumer behavior and 
purchase criterion 
• 
Quality is top purchase 
criterion for freezer bags 
- lower quality from China 
• 
Price is top criterion for plastic 
plates and utensils 
• 
Style is top criterion for 
specialty plates and utensils 
- Highly variable demand 
requires shot lead times 
Effect on current 
production capabilities 
• 
Current plant is at capacity 
- Outsourcing would eliminate 
need to build additional 
capacity 
• 
Plastic plates and utensils are 
50% of total production 
- Outsourcing may create too 
much extra capacity 
Recommendation 
• 
Outsource plastic plates and utensils to China 
• 
Do not outsource specialty plates and utensils 
• 
Do not outsource freezer bags (although further analysis may be warranted) 
Other factors 
• 
To compensate for extra capacity that would be created in current plant, could produce new product line, 
rent out spare capacity, or move to smaller facility 


===== PDF p45 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHINA OUTSOURCING OPPORTUNITY 
QUESTIONS AND FACTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic 
Information 
Raw mats 
➡ 
Layering 
➡ 
Sheeting 
➡ 
Packaging 
➡ 
Distrib. 
Supply chain 
• Rolls of 
paper 
• Adhesive 
• Non-stick 
liner 
• Adhesive 
and liner 
applied to 
rolls 
• Rolls of 
layered 
paper cut 
into sheets 
• The client is not capacity constrained in its manufacturing process 
• The client’s manufacturing and packaging operations are currently configured to package specialty papers in boxes 
Customers 
• There are approximately 24,000 commercial printers in the United States 
• Printers are roughly categorized into three groups: small, medium, and large 
• Differences among the groups are driven by the type of printing technology employed and the size of print 
jobs that the printers are able to serve 
• Printers prefer to receive product from the specialty paper manufacturers in different forms, primarily driven 
by the type of printing technology employed 
- Small printers prefer to receive their specialty paper in boxes 
- Medium printers prefer cartons of specialty paper 
- Large printers prefer to receive palletized shipments of specialty paper 
Market share 
• The client has approximately 30% market share with small printers and only 10% share with medium 
and large printers 
Client financials 
• Margins are currently acceptable but management is against cutting price to gain market share, knowing that 
competitions can match price cuts 
• Price and cost to serve per equivalent box are different for each customer type 
