===== PDF p95 =====
29.) Pharma - New Vaccine (BeG, Round 1) 
Stem: 
Our client is a pharmaceutical company interested in expanding into vaccines. They have no 
vaccines on the market, but have a new flu vaccine in clinical trials. Estimate market demand 
and give them a positioning strategy. 
Additional data if asked: 
Is this flu vaccine different than the one I get every year? 
Yes. We'll talk about how it is different later; for now, assume that the current flu vaccine is a 
commodity with no differentiation. It must be given every year. This is the vaccine that the CDC 
recommends that certain segments of the population get every year to prevent the seasonal flu 
and is either given via injection or nasal mist. Our vaccine is differentiated, and a number of 
other pharma companies have differentiated flu vaccines in their pipelines. All are in late 
clinical trials and none are on the market yet. 
Structure: Ok, I'm going to look at this problem this way: 
Market Demand; Current Market; Future Market 
First we'll look at the question asked, which is the demand for commodity flu vaccine. Next 
wen use this to look at the current market and its growth, customers, buyers, and suppliers. 
Lastly, we'll look at the future market to figure out our strategy. When we look at the future 
market, we'll need to find out more about how the product is differentiated so we can look at 
who the customers are (and possible segmentation) and how this relates to our competitors. 
Phase 1: Current Market 
Well, the current market is driven by the CDC's recommendations on who is most at risk. I 
know I don't get the shot every year, but I know other age groups are much more likely to. Let's 
break it down by age. 
Assume 300 million people in the US. I'll divide them into 6 age groups, each with 50 million 
people. The CDC recommends that the very young and very old get the vaccine, so we'll 
assume 1000/0 vaccination at the ends. I know that myself and my peers don't often get the 
vaccine, so our rate will be lower and will likely be a minimum for people 30-60. Let's see what 
this tells us about market size. 
Age Range 
0-15 
15-30 
30-A5 
45-60 
60-75 
75+ 
-......,;,: Management 
1111111111 Consulting-
~~~~I~:.~ Club 
Population (M) 
% Vaccinated 
# Vaccinated eM) 
50 
100 
50 
50 
50 
25 
50 
10 
5 
50 
10 
5 
50 
50 
25 
50 
100 
50 
Total 160 million 
2010-2011 1st Year Case Book 
141 


===== PDF p96 =====
So I estimate the annual market demand is 160 million doses. 
How do you think we could grow that number? 
Well, the most room for growth is the middle. There ~ s also some room at the ends of the age 
range since the real rate is <1000/0, but that's not as big a growth opportunity. 
The first way would be to get people like me to get the shot. For a vaccine, the end user is not 
the buyer - the buyer is local, state~ and federal health authorities and nledical practitioners like 
doctors and hospitals. This means that direct marketing (like TV ads for Lipitor) probably won't 
do us a lot of good because the end user isn't buying the product. Instead, we could work with 
those health authorities to raise awareness of the flu vaccine and its importance for people in the 
middle age ranges, if not for themselves then for the safety of the young and old around them. 
Lastly, the young and old are likely limited by distribution - moms who can't get their infant to 
the doctor and the elderly who can't get to a clinic easily. Thus, we could work with health 
authorities to increase access, maybe by having a mobile van that vaccinates at day cares and 
nursing homes. 
Ok, what's next? 
Let's talk about the current market. We've basically covered a lot of this already - our growth 
depends on working with public health authorities (and population growth), our buyers are 
medical people and health organizations, and we and our competitors all duke it out on price for 
very little margin. 
Phase 2: Future Market 
Let's look at the future market. At this point, I really need to know more about the product. 
How is our product different? 
You tell nle. 'What are some ways that it could be differentiated? 
(Comment: This specific Sloan candidate had experience in the industry, and therefore Jiad some 
technical knowledge. If this is not the case for the current candidate, provide the info as is 
requested). 
Well, current vaccine is delivered via nasal spray, prefilled syringe, or multiuse vial and a 
separate syringe~ so one way would be a neW delivery system. Also, the current flu protects 
against three strains of flu, so we could add strains to add protection. Though it's unlikely, it 
could also be a longer lasting vaccine that protected for multiple years. It could have less side 
effects, not be egg-based (for people with egg allergies), or could have higher efficacy. 
Assume our differentiator is a delivery system,. Our vaccine is a pill. 
Is that different than our competitors' new vaccines? 
....... Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~:~I~:~ Club 
2010-2011 1 st Year Case Book 
142 


===== PDF p97 =====
Yes, they differentiate based on something different. 
That's great! That allows us to explore a few options: 
• 
Reach market segments that are currently hard to capture. For instance, some people 
don't get the shot because they don't like needles. 
• 
If our pill doesn't require refrigeration like the current vaccine, we can lower costs by not 
having to use refrigerated equipment in the distribution chain. 
• 
A big part of flu vaccines COGS is the syringe or nasal inhaler itself - depending on how 
much the vaccine itself costs, this could have lower COGS than current vaccines 
So what's our strategy? 
Let's segment the market. If our COGS are higher than current products" health authorities have 
strapped budgets and want the low cost option for most people, but we'll position our product as 
a higher cost option to serve the hard-to-reach segments that are currently underserved. If our 
overall COGS turn out lower, we might be able to lower price and expand into the existing 
commoditized market. It would take years for a competitor to get a similar product through 
development and clinical trials, so we've probably got a 5 year headstart to take over the market. 
After that, it will be harder. 
That sounds good. Incidentally, bes,ides reaching more of the population, why might health 
authorities like our product? 
The pill might not require refrigeration, would prevent accidental needle sticks, would remove 
the high cost of disposing of biohazardous waste, and would be much faster to deliver. 
Great, thanks. 
~---
-~~~~ 
~~ 
~~ 
...... Management 
1111111111 Consulting 
~~I~I~:;,~ Club 
2010-2011 1st Year Case Book 
143 
