===== PDF p35 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 32 
 
Case 14: Automotive Parts – Make vs Buy 
Company: A.T.Kearney 
 
Our client, a global automobile manufacturer has been losing money for several years in its North 
American division. The new CEO suspects a big reason may be his company’s high degree of vertical 
integration. This client makes about 70% of its own parts, compared to 30-50% at its chief 
competitors. The CEO has asked us to develop a cost saving strategy around this issue 
 
Instructions to the interviewer: This case tests the candidate’s ability to develop a framework to 
solve the problem rather than the candidate’s ability to crunch numbers. Most A.T.Kearney cases we 
have seen are like this. And this case is a great example for how to arrive at hypothesis. 
 
Background information (available if asked for) 
 
- 
The client spends 35% of its North American revenues on its parts-making operations 
- 
It buys (sources) another 10% from independent suppliers, most but not all of which are located 
in North America 
- 
Its parts-making operations are spread over six divisions and cover about 100 plants in the U.S. 
and Canada. The same parts are often made in several plants 
- 
All the plants are union, with high labor costs and generally average (often poor) quality 
- 
Top UAW executives are split over issue of “give backs” — reducing labor rates, benefits, 
retirement perks, etc., in return for fewer layoffs. Some union execs want to work with the new 
CEO, others want to show him how strong the union is 
- 
There is excess capacity in our client’s parts manufacturing plants, as well as throughout the auto 
parts supplier industry 
- 
Auto parts suppliers would be eager to win business from our client because it would reduce 
their dependency on the other two U.S. auto manufacturers 
 
How to approach the problem? – Great example of hypothesis driven problem solving 
 
- 
First question 
o “Given the situation, what is the key hypothesis? How would you state it?” 
o Note to interviewers: a strong hypothesis is a testable statement that, if true, has 
significant implications for the client 
o Expected answers should be something like: 
 “The client could save $X millions by making only those parts where it has a 
competitive advantage or a strategic requirement (i.e., to be in the business of 
making a certain part)” 
- 
Second question 
o “Let’s assume for the moment that your hypothesis proves to be true.  What are the 
significant implications to our client?” 
o Listen for the soundness of the candidate’s logic, or for the creativity/intuition she uses 
to answer this question 
 
 


===== PDF p36 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 33 
 
Third question 
o “Let’s assume the hypothesis is as follows:  The client could save $X millions by making 
only those parts where it has a competitive advantage or a strategic requirement” 
o “How would you go about testing this hypothesis?” 
o Note to interviewers:  this is the same as asking for a basic framework or work plan — 
what are the key issues that need to be resolved?  How are you going to resolve them? 
o Stay at the “big picture” level — no need for details here 
 
At a minimum, frameworks should cover these key points: 
- 
Comparative costs 
o What it costs our client to make the parts, versus what it would cost to buy them from 
independent suppliers 
- 
Strategic value 
o What strategic value is there to making certain parts, even though they could be 
purchased for less than it costs to make them, e.g., batteries for electric vehicles 
 
So a good framework might be: 
 
 
Better frameworks would incorporate some of these features: 
o Would this be practical? 
o Include union and client managers on the study team to promote buy-in of the results 
o Benchmark the client’s North American parts manufacturing plants 
 Against themselves to show “best current capabilities” 
o Against other firms’ auto parts manufacturing plants  
o Get quotes from potential suppliers around the world for a broad cross-section of 
parts to establish market prices 
o Interview the client’s R&D, design and engineering managers to determine which 
parts are strategically important and why 
o Given the excess capacity in the industry, assess the opportunity for further cost 
savings by consolidating parts currently made in several plants into a single plant 
o Analyze the cost chain and cost drivers of parts manufacturing.  This would lead to the 
importance of standardization of parts across platforms, and economies of scale 
Buy 
Attack Costs 
Rationalize 
Make 
Cost To Make 
Versus Buy 
Strategic Value 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
