===== PDF p16 =====
2005-2006 MICHIGAN CONSULTING CASE INTERVIEW PREPARATION GUIDE
- 18 -
© 2005 Michigan Consulting Club
Case 5: United States Healthcare (I of II) 
McKinsey & Company, Round II
I have just been talking with with Rick Wagoner, GM’s 
CEO, about his company’s skyrocketing health care 
costs.  GM pays for the health care of  about 1.1M 
families, which equates to about $8-9B or $1500 per car 
sold.  After a while, he began discussing the United 
States’ healthcare problem on a national level.  
The US spends 15% of its GDP on health care while 
Japan spends 7-8% and Germany spends 10%.  
However, he says there is no evidence that health care is 
better in the US: average life expectancy is actually 
decreasing and about 45M people are uninsured.  
He wanted me to explore possible causes and solutions 
for the increasing cost trend with decreasing 
effectiveness/quality.  He made a point of saying he 
didn't want to discuss politics, and shied away from 
fancy frameworks in our discussion
Might you help me think about what to tell him? 
• There is no additional information to provide.  The 
purpose of this case is to test poise and pressured 
thought.  If the candidate makes an assertion, play 
‘devil’s advocate’ and try to get the candidate to 
reverse him or herself.  Some examples may include:
• Privatized vs. socialized medicine
• Subsidized medicine development/sales vs. 
unsubsidized
• Healthcare availability for all
• Boutique hospitals vs. full service hospitals
• Preventative vs. reactionary medicine
Problem Statement Narrative
Guidance for interviewer and 
information provided upon request
Establishing the 
Case
Establishing the 
Case


===== PDF p17 =====
2005-2006 MICHIGAN CONSULTING CASE INTERVIEW PREPARATION GUIDE
- 19 -
© 2005 Michigan Consulting Club
Case 5: United States Healthcare (II of II) 
McKinsey & Company, Round II
Supply
Demand
Sample Solution 
Elements
Sample Solution 
Elements
There are any number of responses to this open-ended case, therefore the interviewer is encouraged to 
allow the candidate to drive the case.  Some common elements may include:
There are any number of responses to this open-ended case, therefore the interviewer is encouraged to 
allow the candidate to drive the case.  Some common elements may include:
No 
proactive 
pre-
symptom 
care
Nutritional planning, exercise, no-smoking, etc. are 
much cheaper to promote rather than having to deal 
with complications (heart disease, diabetes) down the 
line.  Possible solution: government (or employer) 
sponsored programs promoting prevention activities. 
Discuss healthcare incentive to do this… where is the 
financial return?
Doctors’
ability to 
induce 
demand
If a large number of doctors choose to live in a 
particular area (a large city, for instance), and there are 
not enough patients to sustain a normal practice, the 
doctors could order additional (and possibly 
unnecessary) tests to generate additional revenue.  
Possible solution: fees per patient rather than fees per 
service performed. Challenge on practicality
Lack of 
health 
care for 
lower 
class
The US treats every patient in the ER regardless of 
insurance.  However, it is much more expensive to 
handle something in the ER rather than when the 
problem first occurs (regular doctor visits, etc)
Possible solution: Provide adequate health care for 
lower class before problems become emergencies. 
Possible free-rider and socialization discussions
Higher 
drug 
costs in 
USA
The US is essentially subsidizing word drug 
consumption by paying higher prices.  US expenditure 
pays for the majority of R&D and risk-premium costs 
for the pharma industry. Possible solutions are to 
persuade drug companies to charge the same prices 
everywhere, or threaten re-importation. Discuss long-
term implications on R&D and curing diseases.
Emerging 
modular 
Care
There is a growing trend of wealthy citizens seeking 
out specialized care from private centers with 
providers accommodating by opening specialized 
clinics that only offer high-margin procedures (heart 
surgery), but are not burdened by low margin, but 
necessary, ER’s, etc.  This takes needed funds out of 
full-service facilities.  Discuss regulations or risks.
Profit 
motive
Healthcare providers need to make lots of money.  
They have invested in careers, R&D, capital, etc, and 
need a return.  This creates a motive of wanting to 
MANAGE disease rather than CURE disease to 
maximize return. All healthcare players make more 
money from a longer-term cash flow than onetime 
treatment.  Discuss socialization vs. current model.
