===== PDF p87 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
83 
We just finished a post merger integration project between two mid-sized pharmaceutical 
companies.  Each of them has broad product portfolios consisting of only branded or patented 
prescription drugs; neither company sells OTC drugs.  The combined company’s sales are the 
largest in the world, comprising 10% of the pharmaceutical drug market.  All organizational 
aspects of the merger are complete (new positions have been assigned and assumed).  The new 
Head of Development comes to us and asks if we can analyze the combined Development 
Portfolio.  He is certain that some of the projects in Development can be eliminated; others he 
feels are blockbusters and should be fast tracked; others are middle of the road type products that 
may be successful and can continue through the normal development process.  He wants our 
team to identify the appropriate product portfolio.  FYI, here is what the development process 
looks like: 
 
R&D     $     Pre-clinical      $      Clinical       $       FDA Approval       $      Launch 
 
Each step in this process can take months or years to complete.  Additionally, the number of 
products in each stage also decreases.  For example, there may be 200 products in R&D, 75 in 
Pre-Clinical, 50 in Clinical, 20 in FDA approval and 5 in Launch. 
 
To identify the ideal portfolio, I would analyze consumer demand, competition, and the expected 
profits and risk of each product in development. 
 
First, I would identify what ailment the product is for and try to determine the total number of 
people facing this illness.  I would determine the current market size for the illness and project it 
out to the appropriate number of year(s) the product requires before it can be launched.  This will 
give us an understanding of the total market size for each product. 
 
Next, I also want to look at what the competition is doing.  In the pharmaceutical industry, being 
the “first” to offer a particular drug can give a company a competitive edge; once physicians 
begin to use a drug, I would assume it is more difficult to make them switch to a new drug unless 
it offered other benefits as well.  Therefore, it is important to concentrate on what the client’s 
competitors have in their development pipeline and their timeline of release relative to ours.  I 
would also want to try to understand the potential reactions of competitors to our client’s 
portfolio decisions.   
 
!"Ok, let’s say we’ve looked at the market size and the competitors, what’s next? 
   
Well, we want to identify the profit potential of each of the products as well as their riskiness.  
Based upon the availability, reputation and pricing of competitive products, I would determine 
the market share our client could expect for each product.  I would then make pricing 
assumptions based upon the costs incurred and competitors’ prices to forecast revenue streams 
for each product. 
 
!"What are the different costs involved? 
 
Well, there are all research, development and testing costs incurred prior to launch.  Once a 
product is approved by the FDA for launch,…well, let’s go through the value chain: 
 


===== PDF p88 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
84 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Approval  $  Manufacturing Costs  $  Sales & Marketing Expenses (training/education of 
physicians)  $  Distribution   $  Customer service 
 
The costs for each product can then be subtracted from the revenue to determine profits for each 
year.  Then, we must take the present value of the profit streams to determine the total profit 
potential, using an appropriate rate that considers the riskiness of the product. 
 
!"Ok, let’s say we’ve done all the research and have an enormous Excel spreadsheet that has 
total costs and revenues by product.  What would you do?  How do you make your decisions? 
 
Well, we can calculate profits as total revenues less costs.  One missing factor to consider, as I 
mentioned earlier, is the riskiness of the product.  I would speak with the scientists working on 
each product to determine the probability of the product actually being launched.  Then, I would 
calculate the expected profit; that is, (Probability of success) * (Profit Potential) + (Probability of 
Failure) * (Potential Loss).  The potential loss is the total of the costs incurred prior to launching 
the product.  [I actually drew a decision tree here showing the two branches of failure or success.  
BCG loves graphs, charts, etc.!]  I would then select the top expected profit products, considering 
competitive positioning and timelines as we discussed earlier. 
