===== PDF p120 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
116 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
There are two rooms: The Switch Room and the Bulb Room.  In the Switch Room are three 
switches (1, 2, 3), all the switches are marked On and Off, and are originally in Off position.  In 
the Bulb Room there are three light bulbs (A, B, C).  You have to match the switches that turn on 
each light bulb.  To do it, you start first in the Switch Room and do what ever you want with the 
three switches.  Then you step into the Bulb Room and without going back to the Switch Room 
you have to figure out which switch controls which light bulb. 
 
The problem is that there are three unknowns and only two equations.  You need extra input.  
The solution is to turn on two lights, and turn one of them off after some time (let’s say three 
minutes), and leave the third switch off, then you walk into the Bulb Room.  There will be one 
light on which is controlled by the switch you left on.  There will be two light bulbs off, but one 
of them will be warm (the extra input!), which is controlled by the switch left on for three 
minutes.  The last light bulb, which will be cold, is controlled by the switch that you always left 
off.  
 
 
 
You are in a room with two identical closed boxes.  The boxes have identical tags that read 
“NPV of the contents of this box is one million dollars.”  What questions would you like to ask 
before you select one? 
 
· 
What is the discount rate of each calculation? 
· 
What is the time frame (and period length) of the two calculations? 
· 
What is the range of possible outcomes of the two packages? 
· 
What is the liquidity of each of the two packages? 
 
 
 
Why are manholes round? 
 
· 
So that the covers can’t fall in the hole under any circumstances. 
· 
So that the covers can be moved by rolling and no lifting is required. 
· 
To provide the greatest opening area for the cost- and weight-limited material used. 
