===== PDF p45 =====
Case 10: H HOTEL 
Booz Allen Hamilton, 1st Round 
 
The Problem 
 
You are hired by H Hotel to advise whether they should raise their daily room rate from 
$160 to $180. 
 
Information Gathering 
 
Read this information well before you give the case.  There’s very limited information to 
begin with, therefore the candidate is expected to ask questions, but in a structured way.  
Allow 10-15 seconds for the candidate to layout his/her assumptions for each step of the 
analysis before giving any clues.  Certain level of stress should be created but the overall 
interview style is pleasant. 
 
Industry Overview 
• Overall market: stable. 
• Segmentation: the hotel industry can broadly be divided into two segments that 
serve different customer needs – one for business purposes and the other for 
vacation. 
 
Exploration: Let the candidate characterize each segment.  For example: business 
hotels usually locate in the center of metropolitan areas, are smaller in size 
compare to the average vacation resorts, are better equipped with in-room business 
services like internet/fax/printer, and are more flexible in booking.  Vacation hotels 
have to be in a touristy or scenery area but not necessary in the center of it, have a 
wider range of price and facilities, and with more fluctuations in demand. 
 
• Competition: The client is the leader in the Business Hotel segment and an 
average player in the Vacation Hotel segment. 
 
Internal Company Analysis 
• The client decided to focus on the Business Hotel unit.  Why do you think they 
made such decision? 
 
Answer:  
1) Location advantage: since the client is already the leader in this segment, they 
must have already blocked the best locations in most of the big cities.  
Competitors are hard to compete with this given the fact that the supply of space 
in hot spots is very limited. 
2) Steady revenue stream: once contracts with big corporations are signed, the 
demand of business traveling is much easier to predict than vacation hotels 
which contributes to a higher occupancy rate.  In addition, a fixed price can be 
set more easily. 


===== PDF p46 =====
3) Lower maintenance cost: business hotels tend to be smaller in size and need 
less recreational facilities. 
 
z 
From an internal view of the company, why do you think they wanted to increase the 
price? 
 
Answer:  To increase profitability. 
 
z 
Does it make sense from H Hotel’s internal view? 
 
Answer:  The usual Profit = Revenue – Cost = Price*Quantity – (Fixed Cost + 
Variable Cost) function should appear here.  Hint the candidate that there’s not 
much room for cost saving by saying “they already outsourced the cleaning service”, 
“they just went through a major layoff and cut the staff by half”, “their restaurant 
and bar are operating efficiently”, etc.  On the revenue side, both increasing quantity 
(occupancy rate) and price (room rate) can increase H Hotel’s revenue. 
 
External Consumer Analysis 
z 
How is the price increase going to impact consumers’ behavior? 
 
Answer:  The candidate should look into both the “end user” (the actual business 
travelers) and the “customer” (the corporations that H Hotel has contracts with).   
The impact on end users is limited since they don’t pay for it.  They won’t stop 
staying at H Hotel as long as the service level, flexibility, location, and other 
conditions remain the same.   
For the customer, most of them have long and stable relationship with H Hotel 
(that’s what makes H Hotel the leader of Business Hotel) will only leave if  
1) the price is not competitive compare to H Hotel’s competitors (in this case it’s 
still competitive) 
2) the price exceeds the cap of its traveling expense (in this case the cap is $240) 
3) no extra benefits come with the price increase (in this case H Hotel provides 
better services, more business friendly facilities, etc.)  
 
z 
Assuming H Hotel successfully increased the price, what can they do to the “end 
user” to increase demand? 
 
Answer:  Let the candidate e creative here, but make sure they hit following points. 
Differentiation: On the product side, H Hotel can improve its convenience (e.g. 
provide transportation/get the hottest spot in the emerging area of a city), increase its 
business friendliness (e.g. in-room fax/printer), and upgrade its rooms, etc.  For the 
service, H Hotel can create a more personalized experience for consumers by 
keeping track of each traveler’s special demand, set the room differently, etc.  One 
step further, H Hotel can also lock consumers in by offering traveler specific 
promotion (different from the ones for the corporate), such as offering free gifts to 
the consumers (e.g. shopping coupons) or cross promotion between H Hotel’s 


===== PDF p47 =====
business hotels and vacation hotels (e.g. free stay at one of the vacation hotels when 
the traveler takes his/her family on vacation next time). 
 
Conclusion 
 
A star candidate will see that his/her time is nearly up and will present a conclusion 
without prompting.  If the interview is within 3 minutes of the end, ask for the conclusion. 
 
 
Answer: The short answer is “Yes”. 
 
z 
H Hotel has competitive advantage given its superior location, good service, and 
trust worthy relationship with long term customers.  Given such strong base, there’s 
room for H Hotel to increase its price with further differentiated product and service.  
Even after the $20 increase, the price is still far below its customer’s ceiling and 
remains competitive among its competitors.  Furthermore, H Hotel can still grow its 
sales quantity by locking travelers who have several business hotel choices in by 
adopting traveler specific promotions. 
 
z 
From an internal point of view, cost saving has reached a limit.  H Hotel has to 
improve its profits by top line growth.  As long as price doesn’t effect quantity 
(occupancy rate), total revenue will grow. 
 
 
