===== PDF p80 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
INVESTMENT DECISION 
 
 
LUMBER COMPANY 
 
 
Question: 
 
A turnaround specialist has retained your services to help him evaluate a medium-sized lumber company as a 
potential acquisition.  How would you determine whether the acquisition is worthwhile? 
 
 
Additional Information: 
  
4           Because most of the company’s products are sold to the construction industry, it faces cyclical demand. 
  
4           Most of the company’s production facilities are fully depreciated and somewhat antiquated. 
  
4           Some reduction in workforce will be necessary to achieve levels of efficiency on par with the best in the 
industry. 
  
4           The company has extensive holdings of forests.  The historical ROI for these assets has been 16%.  This is 
actually less than the company’s cost of capital of 18%.  If the company were acquired, some of the acreage 
of forests could be sold.  This would 1) provide cash to fund capital improvements, and 2) improve ROA. 
  
4           The potential exists to placate environmentalists and improve operating efficiency by 1) increasing 
selectivity in tree cutting, and 2) upgrading process machinery to peel trees more efficiently. 
  
  
Possible Approach: 
  
Ultimately, the decision of whether to acquire the company should be based on a conservative assessment of 
  
1) Market potential – can the company expand into other industries to remove cyclicality and increase sales? 
  
2) The potential to improve the company’s operations – will investments in new machinery improve efficiencies 
while providing tax shields for higher cash flows?  Will infusion of fresh equity reduce the cost of capital? 
What’s the debt level – can we renegotiate the interest rates? , and 
  
3) Predicted competitive reaction.   
  
Because of the cyclicality of the industry, it is particularly important to look at downside and upside scenarios.  
Sales below projections will be a problem, but sales growth higher than expected may also be a problem if 
the company ends up starved for working capital. 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 106 
 
