===== PDF p28 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
24 
 
Case 6: Private Label Sales 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm:        McKinsey & Company 
Round:     2005 Summer, First 
Content:   Brainstorming- completely qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
We’re going to look at a growing trend in the Consumer Packaged Goods industry.  Our client is 
a bottled water company (e.g. Poland Springs).  A major retailer (e.g. Walmart) wants our client 
to create a private label version of its product.  In other words, in addition to our client’s bottled 
water which they already carry, they want the client to make an additional, lower-priced bottled 
water which will be their own brand label, (e.g. Walmart Bottled Water). 
 
What are the pros and cons of doing this? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
As it was given in the interview, this is more of a situation analysis and brainstorming exercise 
rather than a case to drill down on and crack.  As such, there may be many more pros/cons 
beyond what is listed in the example below.  In general, it is important to be structured and try to 
put the pros and cons into clear buckets.  Considering the 3C’s (e.g. impact on customer 
relationship, company’s operational issues, and competitive dynamics) could also be helpful in 
this case. 
 
EXAMPLE SOLUTION 
 
Pros:   
• Improved relationship with a powerful merchant (may get better shelf space and better 
terms on other products they purchase from us as well as cross-marketing arrangements) 
• Larger production may achieve better economies of scale in both fixed costs (cost/unit to 
produce, esp. if certain operational procedures are synergistic) and variable costs 
(delivery, distribution, etc.) in addition to the potential to negotiate better terms with 
suppliers due to larger orders 
• Huge potential revenue growth for our company (lower price but potentially high 
volume) 
 
Cons:  
• Cannibalization of our own private label’s water sales (cost/benefit analysis of whether 
the volume of Wal-Mart’s brand will make up for it) 
• Possibility of lessening our power with the merchant as a supplier if private label takes 
off and supplants our own product 


===== PDF p29 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
25 
 
• Higher costs (Fixed- such as additional plant requirements due to potential capacity 
constraints – will the investment be worth it?) 
• More complicated distribution adding additional SKU into the mix  
• Potentially a different market for our product which does not work synergistically with 
our marketing focus (for example if our product is about prestige and image, we would be 
catering to a different customer segment with a lower priced product)  
