===== PDF p10 =====
CASE 2:  HOLDING COMPANY (Booz Allen – Round 1) 
 
                  
 
Client is a holding company or conglomerate. They are a longstanding client of ours. Their 
revenues are about 1.5B/year. They hold all sorts of companies, mostly around low tech 
manufacturing, including roughly in the “Oil and Gas” “Automotive” and “other” categories. 
The holding company doesn’t really have a unified portfolio, but basically places bets on 
companies it acquires. It is now looking at an auto parts manufacturer, and trying to get an idea 
of whether it should acquire it.  
 
What kind of things would you want to investigate to find out whether it was a good idea? 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Financial health is excellent – sitting on a lot of cash. Their portfolio is well diversified. They are 
not looking for “synergies” necessarily.  
• After market products – winches for cars, trucks, ATV’s (revenues of 300M for this product line). 
• They have 90% of the market in the US, and the market is expected to have flat growth. 
• Second division is drive train mechanism for switching car from 2W drive to 4W drive. It’s a  
small niche market, mostly luxury cars.  
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
5
 
What were some options for the Winch products since the market in the US seemed tapped out? 
We talked about markets not really existing in other geographies because it was mainly ATVs and 
they weren’t as common in other countries. We talked about leveraging the technology and although 
nothing else could be made with it, they did discover a use as a “tool” for home and shop use (to lift 
bricks etc). 
 
Who would the customers be here?  
We talked about small contractors and home use consumers (do it yourself) I asked where they 
shopped and it turned out that small contractors shopped mainly at wholesalers and big box shops like 
Home Depot. The trend was moving towards big box. These shops only renew their contracts once a 
year with manufacturers.  
 
How would you figure out margins for Home Depot? 
We talked about how margins were based on margin/square foot and that you could ask for a small 
space, but keep it extremely well stocked at all times and keep our packaging small.  
 
How would you bring in customers in this entirely new market?  
Advertising through do it yourself channels on TV, magazines, in-store demos. (this apparently didn’t 
work as well b/c they had to send people to 350 stores to do the demos and for a small company it was 
too much). 
 
He then wanted to talk about sales in the Drive Train component area:  
I asked about consumers, and we talked about consumers being both end consumers and auto 
manufacturers. I asked how often cars were redesigned and he said every 4-5 years, but the trend was 
going down towards every 3 years.  
 
What does this tell us?  
The opportunity to get in a redesign is better.  


===== PDF p11 =====
 
What does this tell us about the future as this time continues to go down? Is this an advantage? 
I said no, because now you will likely have more competitive pressure from those who saw this as a 
barrier.  
 
Lastly, he wanted to know how I would evaluate the overall deal tactically.  
I talked about doing some sort of return on investment calculation to make sure the return was 
adequate, and that the results we needed in a particular time frame existed. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
My concern in this case would be that the interviewee hasn’t developed a clear set of criteria for 
assessing the potential acquisition and used these to drive through the case in a structured fashion. 
 
There are a number of potential approaches but I would probably break it down as follows: 
 
• Before anything else I would ask for some more information on the potential target’s business. 
What products do they sell? What are their revenues and margins? Etc. Then I would analyze 
whether this makes the acquisition desirable by looking at the following: 
 
o First I would want to look at whether this is an attractive industry to be getting into 
generally – The automotive parts industry seems to be generally consistent with the 
other products in their portfolio so I would assume that they probably have the skills to 
manage this sort of business, is that correct? I would also want to look at the growth 
prospects for this industry. Is the automotive parts industry expected to grow faster or 
slower than other low tech industry companies they may also choose to invest in? 
 
o Second I would want to examine whether this is the right company within the 
automotive parts industry to buy – in particular I would want to know to what extent 
our client could derive value from the acquisition. Will there be any synergies with the 
other companies that our client owns? Will our client be able to improve profitability 
by driving costs out of this business? Are there opportunities to increase sales or grow 
the business faster than existing management is predicting? 
 
o Finally I would want to consider these potential improvements from a financial 
perspective. Does the client have a certain NPV or ROE target that it is looking to 
achieve before it invests? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
