===== PDF p80 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
76 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Your client has developed a revolutionary product.  It is a transporter machine that can take 
anyone (or anything) placed in it from NYC to London in 10 minutes.  (This machine is similar 
to the contraption on Star Trek where the person is “beamed” to the location desired)  How 
would you price one trip? 
 
There are three things to consider: demand for the product, the client’s cost and the alternatives 
available for transportation.  Can you tell me about the size of this machine?  I mean, can you 
only transport humans or can you also transport, say, an automobile? 
 
!"It’s rather large, but there are seats that are very spatiously laid out.  Let’s stick to humans 
and perhaps small packages. 
 
Ok, well, I would think that most of the demand for this product would come from human usage 
and not from the packages.  Because of technology, documents can be faxed, e-mailed, etc. 
which are also quick methods of transfer.  Only larger packages or original documents needed in 
10 minutes would comprise the demand on the package size.  I’m going to focus on the human 
side. 
 
!"That sounds reasonable.  How would you assess demand from people? 
 
Well, 10-minute travel time to London is very appealing; the only other alternatives are to take a 
regular air flight (7 hours) or to take the Concord (2 hours).  Since the client’s transportation 
machine is much quicker, I would imagine that we could charge at least some premium over 
either alternative.  Therefore, we are probably looking strictly at the business traveler or very 
wealthy individuals.  I would further narrow the business traveler market by assuming that only 
top executives would use this machine.  I don’t see many Wall Street analysts taking the 
Concord!  To estimate this number, I would determine the number of top executives at all 
publicly traded companies and add to that executives at larger, privately held companies.  For the 
wealthy, we can probably take the U.S. population and estimate the number of people in the top 
income brackets.  Would you like me to go through these estimations? 
 
!"No, let’s say we’ve done that and now you have a total market size estimate.  What do you 
want to do next? 
 
Well to develop a pricing strategy, we could use a number of methods.  We could estimate the 
costs and then include a markup.  Otherwise, we could take the price of an alternative product 
and determine the value of the extra benefits our client’s machine offers.  Of course with either 
method we need to recognize the tradeoff between price and the number of trips demanded, as 
well from an economics perspective the marginal cost and revenues.  
 
!"Ok, I don’t want to get into a quantitative discussion.  Can you expand upon what the extra 
benefits of using the machine might be and how you assign a value to them? 
 
Sure!  I guess the main benefit is the timesaving the traveler obtains by the using the machine.  
Additionally, perhaps the actual ride, seating, etc. are more comfortable. 
 
!"Let’s concentrate on the time.  Tell me different way you would value an executive’s time? 


===== PDF p81 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
77 
 
Well, you could look at the total compensation vs. total hours worked to determine an “hourly” 
wage.  Or, you could try to link the revenues of the business to the executive to determine how 
much revenue is generated by one hour of his/her time.  [The interviewer is still waiting for more 
ideas]  Hmmm…you can probably argue that the additional time can bring in new revenues as 
well, so use an estimate of how much more money can be generated with the extra time (new 
deals/contracts, etc).. 
 
!"That sounds great – thanks. 
 
[This was definitely a case looking more for creativity and “out of the box” thinking more so 
than analytical skills.  I have heard that during second rounds, BCG uses each of its interviews to 
test for a different critical skill.  In this interview, it was testing creativity.  The case part of the 
interview lasted less than 15 minutes] 
 
 
