===== PDF p57 =====
53 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
CREDIT CARD COMPANY 
 
Category: Profitability 
 
 
Question 1 (posed by interviewer): 
 
You are a consultant hired by a credit card company to analyze the better way to increase 
profitability on an individual account basis. 
 
Solution: 
 
Profit structure for a credit card company on a customer basis comes from 
- 
Revenue = interest rate charged to customers on the outstanding balance + annual fees + 
usage of CC balance statements as an advertisement vehicle + late fees. 
- 
Variable Costs = opportunity cost of capital (passive rate) + operations costs (monthly 
statements) + [non-recoverable credits] * [probability of permanent loss]. 
 
Advertising, fixed costs and the rest of period costs are not taken into account as they impact the 
profit structure independently of the profitability on an individual basis. 
 
In order to increase profitability on a per account basis, the credit card company can either focus 
on increasing the revenue side or lowering the cost side. 
To increase the revenue of the company, the company can: 
- 
Lower the APR to attract consumers with high outstanding balances s these are the 
profitable ones. 
- 
Promote the balance statements as a direct to home marketing vehicle (although impact 
would be minimal). 
- 
Increase late fees to promote a higher minimum payment success and reduce the risk in 
the client portfolio. 
To decrease the costs of the company, they can: 
- 
Lower operations costs with minimal impact as they are currently in line with industry 
benchmarks. 
- 
Lower the percentage of the customer base with non recoverable credits. 
 
Question 2: 
 
You have talked about the composition of the credit card client pool made of different customers, 
please go more deeply into that and tell me how it affects profitability. 
 
Solution: 
There are three types of clients: 
a- Clients that purchase in line with their income and make full payments every month. 
These clients are the least profitable as the profit source from the rate differential is lost. 


===== PDF p58 =====
54 
Case Interview Study Guide © 
 
b- Clients that have future income growth expectations and thus spend above their current 
means. These clients usually have a significant outstanding balance and thus are highly 
profitable. 
c- Clients that default on their payments behind spending above their means. These clients 
are the costlier ones as the probability of not recovering the outstanding balance grow 
with the increase in the latter. 
 
Question 3: 
Now that you have defined the client base, how would a chart with account profitability on the Y 
axis and rank from least profitable to more profitable on the X axis look? 
 
Solution: 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 4: 
What would you do to improve the customer base mix? 
 
Solution: 
The first thing would be to attract more profitable customers. That is to go after the ones that 
have a higher probability of having an income increase. To do this you could do targeted 
marketing towards students, people that just got a job offer, people having a child. To attract the 
general public that usually has a high outstanding balance you could lower the APR rate if the 
elasticity of the market is high and thus increase the number of users that would benefit from a 
lower rate (B type). To avoid attracting Type A customers you can have a higher annual fee and 
thus make it non worthy for them to apply for a card but worthwhile for the B type.  
To cleanse the portfolio of the C types, you could increase the late fees (through high interest 
rates) to such levels so as to promote on time payment. 
Profitability per account in 
$ 
More 
profitable 
C type 
A type 
B type 
