===== PDF p68 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
NEW PRODUCT 
 
CONSULTING FIRM 
 
 
Question: 
 
You are the managing director in a large international consulting firm.  Traditional strengths of your firm have been 
solving strategy and organizational issues. Recently, you have noticed an increasing number of your firm’s 
proposals are being rejected because of a lack of information technology expertise in your firm. So far, your firm’s 
growth has been strong enough that proposals lost have not hurt annual earnings.  Nonetheless, you are becoming 
increasingly concerned about the need to develop the firm’s capabilities in information technology. 
 
1:   
Assuming your concern is valid, what reasons will you provide to other partners about the need to acquire 
information technology skills? 
2:   
Assuming you are able to convince other partners of the importance of IT expertise, what steps would you 
take to rapidly build IT capacity in this area? 
3: 
What are the major risks in executing an IT capacity-expansion? 
 
 
Approach: 
 
1:   
Good answers focus on the value of IT to clients:  discussion topics include the increasing importance of 
information in business, strategic value of information and information flows, importance of information 
systems for implementing new organizational structures and management control systems. 
 
 
Better answers focus on the costs of losing clients to competitors:  discussions included the encroachment 
costs of having clients talking with competitors about IT problems, risk of losing credibility with clients by 
not being able to solve a problem. 
 
2:   
Good answers will focus on various methods to build expertise:  buying expertise by acquiring another firm, 
by raiding IT practices of other firms for a few key consultants, building capacity through recruitment of IT 
experts and training them to be consultants, building capacity by training current consultants in IT practice 
skills, establishing a strategic alliance with a IT boutique firm. 
 
 
Candidates should discuss the pros and cons of each method proposed:  impact on firm’s current culture, cost 
to the firm, time needed to build expertise, etc. 
 
 
Better answers will realize the importance of stimulating client demand as capacity builds through seminars, 
articles strategic studies in IT areas… 
 
3:   
Good answers depend on the expansion methods discussed, but an important issue is the loss of the firm’s 
focus away from just strategy and organization. 
 
 
Better answers will focus on the difficulty of implementation in IT, rapid technology changes in the IT 
industry require significant ongoing training and development costs; new practice cultures may be 
significantly different from current culture, especially if “external experts” are brought into the organization. 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 94 
 
