===== PDF p59 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
55 
 
Your client is a major pharmaceutical company, which has been approached with the following 
business proposition.  You have been asked to lay out how you client should evaluate the 
opportunity: 
A small hospital in West Virginia has developed a total cardiovascular health program for its 
outpatient population.  The program has been in place 3 years and has been highly successful in 
improving the cardiovascular health status of the patients as measured by several parameters. The 
hospital would like to “sell” this program to other hospitals for a fee, but could not undertake 
such a task on their own.  Instead, the W. Virginia hospital would like to license the program to 
your client, and your client would market it to other hospitals. 
 
Ok.  I want to make sure I’m addressing the key issue here—the client wants me to develop a 
methodology for evaluating this opportunity to license a cardiovascular health program from this 
hospital and market it.  The client doesn’t want me to come up with a final Go/No Go answer. 
 
!"Correct. 
 
Do you mind if I take a few seconds to think a bit about the problem? 
 
!"Sure.  Go right ahead.  We’ll start when you’re ready. 
 
I would present my methodology for evaluating as a series of very basic Yes/No questions.  Of 
course to answer each question we’d have to go into more details, but I’d like to first lay out the 
broad framework. 
 
!"OK.  I think that’s an excellent way to go about it. 
 
First, does this program actually work and can it be applied with similar success in other 
hospitals.  Second, what is the potential NPV of this opportunity.  And third, are there other 
opportunities available to your client that would create a greater return on their investment.  If 
the answer to any of these key questions is no, then the client should not pursue this opportunity. 
 
!"Very good.  So why don’t we go through each of the questions and what I’d like you to 
do is to address the key issues you’d consider. 
 
First of all, having had some experience with research on patients with cardiovascular disease, I 
know that study results are not always straightforward.  For instance, I would want to know 
which parameters were improved—was quality of life improved, was overall survival rate 
improved?  Also, I would be concerned that the results from the study on patients from this one 
hospital in W. Virginia could not be extrapolated to other patient populations in other settings. 
 
!"So what would you recommend to the client based on these concerns. 
Since the client is a pharmaceutical company, I would guess that they have a fair number of 
scientists that could look more carefully at this one hospital’s results and decide if the program 
could be successful if widely marketed. 
 
!"That’s fair.  How about the next question, evaluating the NPV. 


===== PDF p60 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
56 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
Well, obviously we’d have to look at the cash flows each year.  That’s going to require some 
knowledge about the licensing agreement that would be place with the hospital. 
 
!"I don’t want to get into details regarding the agreements, or even specific numbers for 
revenue.  Let’s try to keep this discussion as “high-level” as possible.  What would be 
the major sources of revenue for your client if they pursued this opportunity? 
 
The main source of revenue would be hospitals paying a fee for the rights to use this program, 
which conceivably could be on a subscription basis, per-patient, one-time… the possibilities are 
endless. 
Also, one thing I didn’t consider is that if the program calls for specific types of medications, 
such as ACE-inhibitors, beta-blockers that the client makes, this might present a major “cross-
selling” opportunity and boost market share for specific pharmaceuticals. 
On the down side, and perhaps I’m being a bit too cynical about pharmaceutical companies—if 
the client is more involved with drugs required during coronary by-pass surgery and this program 
was actually successful and kept people from needing by-pass surgery then the client would, in a 
sense, be cannibalizing its sales of coronary by-pass drug sales. 
 
!"That is very cynical, indeed!  Your client actually has some ACE-inhibitors on the 
market that very well could be incorporated into the program. 
 
Again, staying at a very high level, and looking at the costs—the licensing fee paid to the W. 
Virginia hospital would be a major cost, and again, it could be structured in countless ways.  
Beyond that, my client would incur costs to market the program to hospitals, so there would be a 
marketing expense.  However, if there is a core competency that Pharmaceuticals have developed 
over the years it might actually be marketing so this would be right up the client’s alley.  In fact, 
if the client already has a strong hospital-based sales force they could very easily be used to sell 
this program. 
 
!"Anything else you want to add to the NPV question? 
 
Yes—well two things really. 
One, if the client were to get involved with a program like this that promotes health overall, I 
think it could have a very positive effect on consumer perception.  Right now the pharmaceutical 
industry as a whole has been receiving very poor publicity for a variety of reasons, so any 
positive publicity for this company would be worth something—it may be difficult to quantify, 
but I think it would be significant enough to consider. 
On the other hand, if the program is promoted and it turns out that patients begin doing much 
worse (for some reason that was over-looked earlier) in the long-run, there is the possibility of 
materially damaging the client’s reputation as a company that delivers safe health care products.  
If the complications resulting from this program very serious, the client may have to consider the 
possibility of law suits and damage payments. 
 
!"Should we discuss the final major question—What other opportunities does the client 
have? 
 


===== PDF p61 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
57 
Sure.  I think this is pretty straight forward.  The client may have several other opportunities that 
it is considering at the moment.  Some of these projects might have better returns, carry less risk, 
and perhaps fit better with the client’s core business of selling drugs. 
 
!"OK.  That’s fine. 
 
This was one of my smoother interviews.  Because I have a background in health care it was very 
easy to discuss this pharmaceutical case.  We went on to talk about the program for another 15 
minutes, but not in a “case” format.   
