===== PDF p12 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
8
Consumer Products Competitive Shake-Up 
 
Opening 
A $20 billion US consumer products company is seeking to realign its 
business strategy in order to maximize profit potential. The firm has 
traditionally focused on internal processes to drive profits, but recent 
industry trends and competitive shifts are forcing key executives to re-
evaluate the company’s competitive strategy. The client has asked you to 
make recommendations to that end. 
 
Background 
Provide the following information if requested: 
 
Company 
The company sells a broad range of consumer appliances (ovens, 
refrigerators, etc.) and accessories through two major outlets: major retail 
outlets and online. 
 
The breakdown is 80% of sales through major retail outlets and 20% online. 
 
Key Insight:  $16 billion of the client’s sales are through brick-and-mortar 
retailers which gives those retailers an enormous amount of 
bargaining power (High Customer Power if using Porters’) 
 
The firm has traditionally used cost-efficiencies to drive profitability, and as a 
result 
has 
not 
focused 
on 
organic 
growth 
initiatives 
(revenue 
enhancements). Therefore many functional areas have become siloed and 
myopic, attempting to maximize functional profits rather than company 
profits. 
 
The interviewee should ask about the major functional areas, and which are 
the profit centers. 
Cost Centers:  
Marketing, R&D, Manufacturing, Call Centers 
Profit Centers: 
Product Sales; Warranty and Service Contract Sales; 
Appliance Parts (for repairs, upgrades, etc.) 
 


===== PDF p13 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
9
The client has seen decreasing product sales, in large part due to consumer 
dissatisfaction with product and service quality. Executives believe that the 
blind pursuit of functional profits has driven focus away from delivering 
highly-valued consumer products and service offerings to the end-consumer. 
 
Key Insight:  The client has maximized profitability from the cost-side, and 
now needs to search for ways to grow revenues – siloed 
functional areas means integrated initiatives have not been 
utilized and that profit-pursuit at the functional level may 
actually destroy downstream value, preventing optimal profit 
realization for the company as a whole. 
 
Competition 
The three major players in the industry, including the client, account for 
approximately 80% of all sales (the interviewee should inquire about the 
competitive shifts mentioned in the Opening) 
 
The #1 and #3 players have recently merged and will now account for a 
combined 50% of all sales. Our client is the #2 player. 
 
Key Insight:   The interviewee should recognize that the client’s market 
share is therefore 30% (and that the industry as a whole is 
therefore about $66 billion - because 30% of the total market 
equals $20 billion). 
The merger of the two major competitors will give that new 
company significant bargaining power with the major retailer 
outlets in comparison to the client. It is therefore likely that 
the client’s retail outlet sales will continue to decline. (High 
Competitive Rivalry if Using Porter’s) 
 
Consumers 
The client draws a distinction between the following two groups: 
Customers are the major retailers who purchase the client’s products for 
resale. 
Consumers are individuals that purchase products through retailers or 
online.  
 
Key Insight:   The end consumer is not the direct profit-maker for the client 
– as a result, the client has traditionally not focused on the 
needs of the end consumers and have seen significant drops 
in consumer satisfaction with regard to the entire product 
experience (from researching the purchase, to the buying 
process, to warranty management to repair service).  
 


===== PDF p14 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
10
Answer 
The main crux of this case is how to deal with increased competitive rivalry 
in a commodities business that is in large part at the whim of the powerful 
retailing outlets that purchase their products for resale to the end-consumer. 
 
Suggested “Answers”: 
 
1) 
The client should refocus resources to increase selling through the 
online space to mitigate the increased competitive and customer 
power. However, have the interviewee think through the risks 
associated with such a strategy: 
 
Risks:  
- 
Retailers may pull the brand from their shelves if the client 
places too much emphasis on direct-to-consumer sales by side-
stepping the retail channel. Can the client afford to lose the retail 
play completely given a current 80% sales level? 
- 
Many end-consumers may not be comfortable purchasing online 
or would prefer to comparison shop in-store before deciding on a 
major purchase. Is there a natural ceiling to potential online 
sales? 
- 
What additional costs will the client need to incur to increase 
direct sales? Does it have the internal capabilities necessary for 
such a play? (shipping, logistics, technology, human resources, 
etc.) 
 
2)  
The client needs to focus on realigning internal processes, metrics and 
goals to maximize company profit rather than functional profit. This 
will require a renewed focus on the end-consumer and on product 
quality. In essence, the current competitive and customer situation 
dictates that the model of pushing product through retailers may not 
work for the client, as the newly merged competitor will be able to 
offer better deals to retailers and take over floor space. By focusing on 
the end-user the client can own the “pull” for its products, and product 
demand will force the retailers to work cooperatively with the client 
and stave off competitive threats. 
 
