===== PDF p23 =====
CASE 9:  CHEWING GUM (AT Kearney – Round 1)     
 
    PROFITABILITY 
 
Client is a chewing gum manufacturer.  Analysts’ reports are giving our client’s stock poor 
ratings.  We want to figure out what’s going on. 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Our client makes all varieties of gum – sugar, sugar-free, whitening, etc.  
• Revenues have remained constant, though profit has decreased. 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
I first looked deeper in profit decreasing issue.  It turns out that lower profit margin gum has been 
selling more while higher profit margin gum has been selling less, which explains the profit loss.   
 
Gum flavor is the most significant cost factor (the cost structure was broken down into gum base, 
flavors, chemicals, and sugar for me).  The issue was that a flavor can only be used for gum, so even 
though the gum manufacturers were much smaller than the flavor producers, the gum manufactures 
had the “power” once the flavor producer created the flavor.  The flavor had to be sold or it would 
go bad.   
 
Our client could create an exclusivity deal with a flavor producer and agree to buy the flavor 
producer’s entire flavor for a reduced price, benefiting both parties in the agreement. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
18
 
By far one of the most common types of case interview questions you will receive is one requiring you 
to analyze changes in profitability. Once you have done a few of these you will recognize that they can 
all be approached in a fairly similar fashion. 
 
A similar approach can be applied to most profitability questions. The simple structure is: 
• Identify as a profitability issue 
• Analyze revenue issues 
• Analyze cost issues 
• Identify cause of profitability decline 
• Outline options to address cause of decline 
• Select a preferred option 
• Explore other ways that profitability might be improved generally (if any) 
 
Applying that approach to the specifics of this case I would probably answer it as follows: 
 
“I am assuming that if analysts are giving our stocks poor ratings that is either because profitability 
has been declining or because profitability is forecast to decline in the future, is that correct?” (expect 
interviewer to say yes, profitability has been declining) 
 
“If that is the case then, in coming up with a recommendation for the client, I would want to explore 
the potential causes of that decline. Given, that profitability is revenue minus costs; I’d like to start by 
looking at what has been happening on the revenue side to see if this is the cause of declining  
 


===== PDF p24 =====
 
profitability and then move to costs, examining each of the different cost components for our client to 
see where there have been significant increases.” (expect interviewer to say that sounds OK) 
 
“So do we have any information as to what has been happening on the revenue side” (expect this to 
get shut down as an avenue when they say that revenue is constant) 
 
“Well if revenues are constant but profits are declining then that must mean that costs have been 
increasing. Do we have any information on what elements of cost have been going up” (your 
interviewer may ask you to outline what you think the major cost components would be or they may 
give this to you. Eventually you will get to the fact that gum flavor is the most significant component 
and that flavoring costs have been going up because your client has been selling more of the flavored 
gum (which has higher cost and lower margin) 
 
“OK, having identified that the most significant cause of the cost increase is that we are now selling 
more of the flavored gum, and that flavoring carries a significant cost, I would like to turn to looking 
at how we can improve our clients profitability by reducing this cost” (if you have missed a major cost 
bucket at this point the interviewer will probably correct you by asking if there is anything else you 
think you should look at first) 
 
“In looking at potential cost savings I would like to explore the following alternatives: 
• Can we use less flavoring? Would sales actually be affected if we simply put less of the 
flavoring component into our mix? 
• Are there cheaper sources of flavoring? Could we save money by using a different supplier? 
What are the alternatives? 
• Could we negotiate a better deal from our existing supplier? Could we get better terms by 
agreeing to exclusivity arrangements? Or perhaps consolidating orders to a smaller number of 
larger batches?  
 
Depending on the interviewer’s responses and the information available you should be able to drive to 
a conclusion and recommendation. 
 
In reaching this recommendation it may be worth noting that we could also explore marketing non-
flavored gum more heavily to try to shift consumer preferences back to gum where we earn a higher 
margin? Or perhaps we could look at restoring our margin on flavored gum by raising the price of 
flavored gum?” (These alternatives are unlikely to be realistic if the market is highly competitive – as 
we would expect, but they may be worth mentioning for completeness) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
