===== PDF p141 =====
Case 19: Agency Overrun
Prompt #1
A federal agency has 160 offices and stores inventory in 40 warehouses across the country. 
Each office has it’s own property management and inventory processes, allowing the offices 
to access inventory from any of the 40 warehouses.  The agency has difficulty tracking 
assets, and estimates that only 10% of all assets are tracked in it’s tracking system.  The 
agency also estimates that 2% of all assets are now permanently lost.  
What is a long-term strategy to improve the asset management process? 
Guidance
Candidate should ask clarifying questions about the issues and then form a framework to attack the 
problem, including systems, offices and warehouses.
Information to be given upon request:
1) Inventory consists of assets such as cars, other motor vehicles, laptops, printers, and other 
office equipment.
2) Property management IT systems vary across offices, and project management systems are 
inconsistently used from office to office
3) Property management IT systems are inconsistent across warehouses
4) There is no barcoding of assets (no tracking number is assigned to any assets that enter the 
system). Assets are associated with an employee’s name and have no other identifiable marking
5) Assets that are not currently in use are rarely entered into the property management system, 
making it likely that an office will order a brand new assets when there are unused assets 
elsewhere in the agency
6) Equipment is occasionally traded and leased between offices.  It is unclear which office owns the 
equipment (for accounting purposes) and which office currently has possession of the assets
7) An individual office can order from any of the 40 warehouses regardless of whether it is the most 
cost effective.
8) Many warehouses are small in size and were created with little thought to the cost effectiveness 
of the warehouse. Approximately 10 large warehouses exist and the remaining 30 are small
Specialty 
137


===== PDF p142 =====
Case 19: Agency Overrun
Prompt #2
What information do you want to gather to understand and analyze the current 
organizational issues? 
Guidance
Candidate should come up what information to seek (underlined), & interview provides italicized info:
1) Who has procurement authority
• Procurement authority varies by office. Offices exist in silos and there is little 
communication between offices. 
• Offices have grown over the years, and many offices now have overlapping procurement 
responsibilities. For example, one office has a designated Head of Procurement, but many 
supervisors bypass the Head of Procurement
2) What are current processes in place to obtain and track assets
• The employee fills out a purchase order (in hard copy) and hands the it to the office’s 
designated Head of Procurement or to their immediate supervisor.  
• The purchase order is almost always approved for purchase and is rarely checked against 
existing inventory.  When the asset arrives, it generally goes directly to the person who 
ordered it without being entered into the office’s system by the Head of Procurement.  
• Once the asset is delivered to the employee, it is rarely tracked and employees are not 
held accountable for these assets when they leave the agency
3) Process to trade assets within offices
No process is in place and no guidelines exist
4) Current IT systems in place across the different offices and warehouses to track the assets
• The agency does not have a top-down communication system to coordinate the purchase 
and tracking of assets throughout the agency
• Some offices use a homegrown database to track assets
5) Who has the ability to champion this project within the agency
• The Chief of Procurement who resides at the agency level
• Within individual offices, the champion and affect change varies
6) Location of current records so the assets currently in use can be moved to an automated system
• Varies by office and they will be difficult to locate
Specialty 
138


===== PDF p143 =====
Case 19: Agency Overrun
Prompt #3
How would you obtain the information you just outlined? 
Guidance
Possible answers include: 
1) Review the existing procurement policy 
2) Obtain an organizational chart to understand who has  procurement authority at the overall 
agency level and within the individual offices
3) Interview key stakeholders to understand their perspective of the process and the current 
challenges the agency faces with the existing process
4) Interview Head of Procurement within several offices to understand how process varies by office 
(should also talk to employees who complete purchase orders and stakeholder in the 
warehouse)
5) Review existing purchase orders to understand redundancies in equipment ordered and to 
understand which warehouse locations offices are receiving the assets from
6) Review existing system with IT champion
Specialty 
139


===== PDF p144 =====
Case 19: Agency Overrun
Prompt #4
What is your recommendation? 
Guidance
Candidate should come up with one or two options (short term and long term).  Possible answers 
include:
1) Centralize purchase authority
2) Improve coordination among offices and warehouses to reduce redundancies in personnel and 
assets
3) Revamp procurement guidelines and enforce those guidelines to track equipment throughout 
agency
4) Implement policy that equipment must be returned to procurement pool before it is loaned or 
leased 
5) Implement database that spans offices and warehouses so there is real time information 
regarding inventory levels and asset location within agency
6) Centralize the warehouses and reduce number of  warehouses from 40 to a more reasonable 
number. Start by closing some of the 30 smaller warehouses and consolidating to the 10 main 
warehouses. Understand which warehouses are centrally located and close any that are 
redundant (based on location)
7) Outsource procurement to a private entity to close warehouses altogether. If this is 
recommended, candidate should mention that a centralized approval and tracking system is still 
needed within the agency
Specialty 
140


===== PDF p145 =====
Performance 
Evaluation
Expected:
• Candidate will ask about the current procurement process and the loaning of equipment
• Candidate will quickly identify that the procurement process is done on a largely ad-hoc basis and 
recommend structuring this process
Good:
• Candidate will consider not just the process and technology involved, but also the human capital 
aspects and 
• Candidate will understand that getting agency buy-in is key to executing a strategy within the 
federal government. 
Excellent:
• Candidate may explore ideas involving the centralization of the warehouses to eliminate 
redundancies.
• Candidate may explore ideas involving the recovery of existing assets  and how to enter and track 
those in the system. 
Case 19: Agency Overrun
141
