===== PDF p18 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
5. Chemical Spill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Type of Case: New Business Model 
 
Opening 
Your client is a U.S. chemical manufacturer in the commodity chemicals business with single-
digit market share. It recently emerged from bankruptcy and has limited capital available. The 
chemicals business is cyclical with pricing cycles of 7 years. The company is worried about 
how it will survive 2008 when it hits the bottom of the pricing cycle. The question is how this 
company can become sustainable, if at all possible. 
 
The chemical manufacturer has hired you to develop a new business model, either through (1) 
acquisition into a non-cyclical chemicals market, (2) the manufacture of new products and 
services for customers, or (3) your own recommendations.  
 
Areas of Discussion 
 
Competitors 
The market is highly fragmented.  A large number of competitors are either stand-alone or 
small in size, or are a small division of a larger conglomerate.  Acquisition is difficult because 
of limited capital. 
 
Customers 
Customers are highly fragmented, each of them purchasing no more than 10% of the chemical 
manufacturer’s inventory annually.   
 
Raw Materials 
Your customer’s raw material suppliers are increasingly turning to “greener” processes and 
products without increasing their total capacity.  This trend is significantly reducing the supply 
of “non-green” raw materials which drives their cost up. 
 
Infrastructure 
Your client currently has 5 plants.  3 are performing well, one has been having problems of 
quality consistency recently and one plant has been historically a bad performer in terms of 
capacity utilization.  All plants are over 10 years old and production is spread evenly over all 
the plants. (none are at capacity) 
 
Government 
Government:  Push from environmental groups has caused additional government taxes and 
regulations on shipping to be enacted recently. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 


===== PDF p19 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
5. Chemical Spill continued… 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Products 
The chemical manufacturer produces two chemicals: X and Y. Chemical Y is a by-product of 
Chemical X with a weight ratio of x = 1.5y (each 1.5 ton of X manufactured results in the by-
production of 1 ton of Y). 
 
 
 
 
2005 Prices per Ton  
 
2006 Prices per Ton 
Chemical X 
 
$150  
 
 
 
$100 
Chemical Y 
 
$175  
 
 
 
$100 
 
 
 
 
2005 Costs per Ton 
 
 
2006 Costs per Ton 
Chemical X 
 
$50 
 
 
 
 
$95 
 
The Manufacturer expects to sell 100% of the chemicals manufactured. All of its plants operate 
below capacity; they currently manufacture 100,000 tons of Chemical X annually to meet the 
market demand.  The pricing changes are normal. 
 
Profit margin should be calculated, in addition to the dollar margin derived from Chemical X 
versus Chemical Y to determine if there is any advantage to changing the product mix. 
 
In 2006, 100,000 tons of X are being manufactured at a profit of $5/ton, deriving a profit of 
$500,000 for Chemical X.  The manufacturing of X results in the by-production of 100,000 / 
1.5, i.e. around 66,667 tons of Chemical Y or 70,000 tons for rounding purposes.  Since 
Chemical Y is a byproduct of X, one can assume a corresponding cost of $0/ton.  The client 
should thereby derive a profit of $100 x 70,000 = $7,000,000 for Chemical Y, and a total profit 
of around $7,500,000 for both chemicals. 
 
Comparatively, the company generated a profit of $100 x 100,000 = $10,000,000 for Chemical 
X in 2005, plus an additional $175 x 70,000 = $12,250,000 for Chemical Y.  This amounts to a 
total profit of 22,250,000 in 2005, and therefore a huge loss in profit.  These results are 
summarized in the following Tables: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 


===== PDF p20 =====
Torch the Case 2007 
Provided by the NYU Stern MCA for use by the McCombs School of Business Graduate Consulting Group 
 
 
5. Chemical Spill continued… 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Recommended Conclusion 
This case is qualitative in nature and can take many directions. 
 
Interviewee should first explore the root causes of the sales and profit cycles including the 
following topics: Why are costs increasing? Why is there a reduction in supply of raw 
materials and can it be addressed? Who are our customer’s customers?  Can the company pass 
them raw material increases?  What are the new government regulations by the FDA? How 
efficient is manufacturing?   
 
Interviewee should further review pros & cons of acquisition, joint venture, licensing, divesting 
a plant or two, and organic growth through new products/services (preferably with a pricing 
cycle opposite that of X and Y).  The dimensions for evaluating each option should include 
impact on sales/profit, ROI, risk, feasibility, and timing.   
 
In addition to organic and inorganic growth, there seems to be opportunities to improve the 
current business model.  For example, since none of the plants operates at capacity and 
Chemical Y can be sold at a higher price/margin than Chemical X in the upside part of the 
pricing cycle, the interviewee may ask these questions: 
 
• Can the plants increase their production of X and Y when the pricing cycle is up?  Are 
there opportunities for cost reduction by increasing the volume of raw materials 
purchased? 
• Can the more profitable chemical Y be produced in larger quantities in upside cycles? 
 
Exploring the trend of raw materials suppliers turning to greener products: 
 
• If the suppliers of raw materials for X and Y are switching to “greener” processes 
across the industry, can the client pass on the price increase along the value chain? 
• Can the client use this as an opportunity to differentiate its products as “green” as well 
and therefore charge a premium? 
 
Possible recommendation may include:  
• Launch new products & services to differentiate from the competition, build customer 
loyalty, gain new customers, and leverage synergies through existing plants. 
• Operating costs may increase with purchase of new materials/machinery for refining 
chemicals. 
• Organic growth must be considered in addition to improving the client’s current 
business model which does not seem to be working well. 
• Possible exploration into joint ventures or divesting the company. 
 
Any number of recommendations would work for this case as long as the interviewee properly 
explores all of the options.  
15 
