===== PDF p60 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
56
Sales Strategy for Will-o’-the-Wisp Studios 
 
Opening 
You work for a major New York City consulting firm and have just met with 
Roger Bishop, CEO of Will-o’-the-Wisp Studios, a small motion-picture studio 
that produces animated features. Mr. Bishop is concerned because DVD 
sales were much lower than had been projected for the studio’s latest 
release – Hopping Time. Further, he is also concerned that this decline in 
sales will repeat itself with the studio’s next release, Great Sands 2: The 
Oasis. You must decide, should he be worried about the decline and if so, 
what actions should he take to counter this potential downturn? 
 
Background 
Provide the following information if requested: 
 
• Will-o’-the-Wisp has been highly successful in releasing family-friendly, 
animated movies that focus on the exploits of talking animals and 
mythical beasts. 
• Will-o’-the-Wisp releases only three movies a year (one during the 
winter holidays and two during the summer). 
• Will-o’-the-Wisp distributes their movies through Poe & Parker Inc., a 
much larger movie studio. The distribution agreement between the two 
companies stipulates the following: 
o Poe & Parker oversees the distribution and marketing of Will-o’-
the-Wisp’s films. 
o For use of Poe & Parker’s distribution network, Will-o’-thWisp 
pays Poe & Parker 20% of their gross box-office receipts. 
o Will-o’-the-Wisp must also compensate Poe & Parker for all 
marketing costs that Poe & Parker spends on Will-o’-the-Wisp’s 
movies. 
o Poe & Parker has exclusive rights to distribute the DVD releases 
of any material based on previous Will-o’-the-Wisp theatrical 
releases (such as direct-to-video sequels). 
o Poe & Parker has the exclusive rights to produce and release 
television programs based on the characters in any Will-o’-the-
Wisp theatrical release. 
• Large movie companies can survive a bad year by relying on the 
steady stream of income their film libraries generate. Will-o’-the-Wisp, 
having a catalog of only 15 movies, lacks that security. 
 


===== PDF p61 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
57
Industry Trends 
• The DVD market for the entire industry is shrinking. Consumers have 
grown content with the personal libraries they have amassed. The 
market for catalog titles is showing signs of saturation 
• The home entertainment market is fragmenting as options such as the 
internet and on-demand cable have captured a larger portion of 
consumers’ dollars and time. 
• Animated talking animal films, which had been a consistently 
successful genre at the box office, are now beginning to underperform. 
 
Competition 
• In the past, Will-o’-the-Wisp had only considered two studios as direct 
competition. 
o Legends Studios, another of the Hollywood majors, has a long 
history of producing animated features for children. 
o Badger Pictures, another major, has a specialized department 
that was specifically created to produce animated releases. 
• Recently the cost of animation has dropped significantly. This has led 
to almost every studio, both major and minor, producing animated 
fare.  
• Most of these recent animated features have focused on the hi-jinx of 
a group of talking animals. 
 
Technology 
• Will-o’-the-Wisp is a leader in the animation industry; however, 
decreases in animation costs have significantly narrowed the gap 
between innovator and follower. 
• The emergence of high-definition DVD technology has signaled an 
eventual change to the format. This will encourage consumers to 
reinvest in their DVD libraries. However, an industry standard has yet 
to be established for the technology. 
• The fragmentation of the industry has also opened avenues for 
potential growth. For example: 
o The Internet looks to become a viable source of movie 
distribution as sites such as Amazon.com and Yahoo have begun 
broadcasting films. 
o Mobile devices such as iPods, cellular phones, and the PSPs have 
also provided a window of distribution that had not existed in 
years past. 
 
Consumer Products 
• Will-o’-the-Wisp controls the licenses on all of its characters; this 
constitutes the third largest stream of income for the company after 
theatrical and DVD revenue. 


===== PDF p62 =====
This edition is provided for the exclusive use by only the Haas Consulting Club and its members. 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2006 by the Leonard N. Stern School of Business Management Consulting Club. 
Do not reproduce or distribute without the permission of the Stern MCA. 
58
Answer 
The purpose of this case is to challenge the student to tackle problems that 
are specific to the demands of a specialized industry. In this instance, Will-
o’-the-Wisp is facing growing competition due to competing technology, the 
commoditization of its genre and diminishing marginal returns from a 
primary revenue stream (DVDs). 
 
Although there is no one “right” solution to Will-o’-the-Wisp’s problems, 
there are some that seem more sensible than others. These include: 
• Steer production away from talking animal pictures to avoid the 
oncoming glut that looks to saturate the market. 
• Explore less expensive direct-to-video DVD releases based on new 
characters. Through direct-to-video releases Will-o’-the-Wisp can build 
their library, create new franchises and increase their consumer 
products revenues. 
• Exploring cash streams that new technology has made possible such 
as ringtones, ring backs, and online games. 
 
Additionally, Will-o’-the-Wisp should also be weary about jumping too 
quickly into a new technology. It must balance being on the forefront with 
moving to far ahead (for example, picking a high definition DVD format 
before an industry standard is set). 
