===== PDF p105 =====
Deloitte 
Human Capital: CRM 
Case 21: Smith Financial CRM  
Prompt 
A major U.S. financial services company has just implemented a Client Relationship Management 
(CRM) system. The goal: To give leadership a real time view into the organization‘s sales channel. 
 
For years, sales teams have maintained client sales information in separate excel spreadsheets. 
This prevented leadership from having visibility into and a holistic view of sales opportunities, 
which meant sending multiple requests to sales teams for the latest and greatest information. 
By the end of fiscal year, all sales teams are expected to migrate their sales data onto this new 
system, and use it to manage all sales information. 
 
You are the change management lead for this project. How would you get everyone on the 
system? Who are the various stakeholders? How would you communicate to these stakeholders? 
 
Note about nature of the Case: This is a Human Capital Case and thus contains an approach much 
different from the usual ―Strategy‖ case. However the candidate should not abandon the use of a 
framework. Here the focus isn‘t so much on the bottom line as it is on the approach needed to 
manage the proposed changes in the organization. The case should be carried out in a 
conversational format with hints and clues to push the candidate alongside the case prompt. 
 
Guidance 
Here are some guiding questions that will help the candidate analyze the situation: 
 
1) Who will be affected by this change? 
2) What are some ways that you can think of to best announce/communicate this change? Is it a 
single person‘s role, or should multiple individuals of different capacities be involved? 
3) Do you think everyone will be happy with this change? How will you handle dissention? 
 
101 


===== PDF p106 =====
102 
Analysis 
  Definition of Stakeholders: Leadership, Sales teams, & the rest of the organization 
  Find out how people in organization like to receive communications 
  Identify a change champion (leads one-on-one sessions) 
  Technical support/training: how to contact the help desk 
  Create a central place for feedback/comments 
  Create honest communications (share both the bad and the good) 
 Generate excitement/ engagement through a fun and well- branded communications campaign (all 
communications/ marketing should use this brand/identity) 
  CEO Webcast (announcing the change initiative) 
Prompt— 
Part II 
Do you see any other change issues? How would you address them? 
Guidance 
Here are some guiding questions that will help the candidate analyze the situation: 
 
1) How do you think on-boarding will work? Will people automatically know how to use the system? 
2) How will we keep people using this new system? What is the benefit to them? (if candidate 
struggles, mention the word ‗incentivize‘ or ‗benefit‘) 
3) How do we know we made the right decision in making these changes? 
 
Analysis 
  Training (web based and classroom based) for sales team and technical support 
  Design and implement incentives/ tie to Performance Management 
  Create success metrics 
 
Deloitte 
Human Capital: CRM 
Case 21: Smith Financial CRM  


===== PDF p107 =====
Prompt— 
Part III 
 
How do you measure success? What do you do if leadership digs in their heels and resists the 
change?  
(After the candidate answers that question, please follow-up with the following question and change 
the direction of the case) 
Now, let‘s change things up. Say the system was implemented - without the help of change 
management - and it failed (i.e., the people have not adopted the new technology). The team 
brings you on to salvage the project. What would you do? 
 
Guidance 
1)  When/how will you set goals for the outcome of this project? 
2) How would you respond if senior management calls you into a meeting to tell you that they refuse 
to use this new system? 
Analysis 

Set measurable goals at the onset of the project: ex. 75% usage by the end of the project, 
reduce number of manual excel reports by 50% within the first 3mo of the CRM launch 

Share with management the other projects that can now be tackled to improve company 
performance, now that less time is being spent on maintaining excel spreadsheets. 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Ask the candidate to synthesize all information analyzed in case 
 
Expected: The candidate will recognize that this change affects employees at all levels of the 
organization and will plan the change accordingly. 
Good: The candidate will touch on the major points mentioned. 
Excellent: The candidate will acknowledge and preemptively address and lay out a contingency 
plan in the event that the CRM rollout does not go as planned. 
Deloitte 
Human Capital: CRM 
Case 21: Smith Financial’s CRM  
103 
