===== PDF p84 =====
© 2012 Kellogg Consulting Club  -- All Rights Reserved 
80 
Case tracker 
Fit Questions 
Industry:         
Consumer Goods 
Level of Difficulty:   
Easy 
Case format: 
Opportunity assessment 
Concepts being tested: 
- Competitive 
analysis 
- Capacity 
contraction 
Case Question 
Our client, Zephyr Beverages, is a division of a large consumer products company. The division produces fruit juices in 
three forms, all under the Zephyr name: chilled, juice boxes, and frozen concentrate. Zephyr had sales of $600 million last 
year, about 3% of the company’s overall sales of $20 billion.  
The chilled segment represents $120 million in sales per year. While juice boxes and frozen concentrate have been 
consistently profitable, chilled juices are only breaking even in good quarters and are losing money in bad quarters. 
Zephyr has received a proposal from upper management to sell the chilled juices business. We need to help them decide 
whether or not this is a good idea. 
Spend  first 15 min on fit 
What do you do for fun? 
What did you contribute 
in your last job that 
made a difference to the 
organization? 
Outside of school and 
work, what is your 
greatest personal 
accomplishment? 
Guide to interviewer 
This is a relatively short case that requires the candidate 
to create a holistic structure for solving the problem: 
what does Zephyr do with an underperforming business? 
It can divest chilled juices, sell its whole juice division, or 
remain in all its business. Any of the three possible 
solutions listed at the end can be argued, but the third 
solution makes the most economic sense.  
The candidate will need to ask for additional information 
that is necessary to solve the problem, rather than 
relying on the interviewer to dispense it all at once.  
Case 9: Zephyr Beverages 
Quants. 
1 
Structure 
8 
Comp. Als. 
Capacity 
By: Edwin Van Dusen, Brian Fox and David Welch (Kellogg Class of ‘04), Edited By:  Ameed Mallick (Kellogg Class of ‘12) 
CPG 


===== PDF p85 =====
© 2012 Kellogg Consulting Club  -- All Rights Reserved 
Clarifying answers and case guide  
Interviewer Guide to Case 
A sample case structure would include the following: 
1)
Identifying the options: sell chilled juice, sell all juice businesses, continue on 
with all businesses 
2)
Qualitative discussion of competitive dynamics 
3)
Discussion of product selection/components, as well as ways to cut costs 
 
When asked, the interviewer can reveal the following additional information: 
• Chilled beverages are a $5 billion worldwide industry 
• The two largest players have market shares of 40% and 25%, respectively. 
Zephyr’s market share, 12% makes it third in the industry. 
• The two market leaders are able to do more advertising, couponing, promotion, 
and trade than Zephyr is able to do. We do not know about their profitability, 
but assume it is positive. 
Clarifying answers to provide if 
Asked 
Industry Characteristics/Market 
Economics 
- It has been growing at GDP the last few 
years and is projected to continue that 
growth rate. 
- The market for chilled juices is 
dominated by mothers with young kids. 
- Brand name is important in this market, 
as mothers tend to prefer reliable 
products. However, the brand premium 
must be in line with other branded 
products and all branded juices sell in 
the same price range. 
- This is a highly price sensitive market 
that loves coupons, promotions, etc. 
Competitive Dynamics 
- This is a highly concentrated market. 
There has not been a lot of change, 
technological or otherwise, recently and 
there are no obvious entrants.  
81 


===== PDF p86 =====
© 2012 Kellogg Consulting Club  -- All Rights Reserved 
Key elements to analyze 
82 
Competitive Dynamics 
Using basic information provided, interviewee should deep 
dive the competitive dynamics in further detail. 
 
Product selection 
Using information about our products vs. our competitors, the 
interviewee should focus on discussion about how to cut costs. 
Notes to interviewer 
• Relevant info: 
• Bad market position: 12% vs. 40% and 25% 
• Assumed profitability differences 
• Disadvantage on trade promotions 
 
• Interviewee should be able  to see that Zephyr is at a 
serious disadvantage on all fronts as a smaller company 
that is both less profitable and less engaged in the kinds of 
trade promotions that key customers covet. The overall 
conclusion should be that this is a weak competitive 
position. 
Notes to interviewer 
• Relevant info (when asked): 
• The market leaders produce pure orange juice/blends 
based on citrus juices. Zephyr uses more elaborate 
blends, usually with a base of pear or peach juice (95% 
of inputs) and flavor with cranberries, bananas, 
mangoes, etc. (the other 5%). Pear and peach juice are a 
similarly price to orange juice, but the other flavorings 
cost about twice as much. 
• A plant in California produces all products; chilled, juice 
boxes and frozen. It would be difficult to find another 
use for the plant without a major conversion. 
 
• This  indicates that, despite a disadvantage, divesting is not 
realistic and there may be room for cost reduction based on 
reformulation to make Zephyr profitable. 
82 


===== PDF p87 =====
© 2012 Kellogg Consulting Club  -- All Rights Reserved 
Solution and recommendations 
Solution & Recommendations 
There are three possible solutions, with no right answer. The recommendation should be well-reasoned, 
comprehensive, and include as much relevant information as possible. 
Sell the chilled juice business. This would, however, affect the juice and frozen concentrate businesses, as there are 
both advertising and manufacturing synergies. 
Sell all of the juice business. This may be more feasible, as the buyer could capture the synergies, but would not be 
too likely to turn the business around. The selling price is likely to be low. 
Keep the chilled juice business and rework the ingredients and costs. This is the most feasible option, as evidenced 
by the success of the competitors. We are probably developing extra features in our ingredient mix that the market 
does not want and is not willing to pay for. Eliminating or scaling back those features will probably allow us to cut 
costs without affecting revenue. 
Bonus/Guide to an Excellent Case 
Prospects who do well on this case will have to be comfortable with ambiguity and with a lack of perfect 
information. They will quickly grasp the issues and delve into the underlying qualitative discussions, coming up with 
a lot of additional risks/potential benefits for each option. 
Creative solutions beyond those listed are possible and encouraged, though should be done within the framework 
of the information available. 
83 
