===== PDF p110 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
106 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
 
I have an odd hobby (odd because this interviewer was male) of knitting.  I knit about 10 
sweaters per year.  I am looking into this as a business opportunity and want you to estimate the 
size of the hand knitting yarn market. 
 
First I would look at all the places that sell hand-knitted sweaters and … 
 
!"Actually, most of the hand knit sweaters sold in stores are produced abroad and the yarn 
they use is produced abroad.  I am more concerned with the high quality hand knitting yarn 
sold in the U.S. for “hobby” type knitting. 
 
OK, then I would try to estimate how many people knit or I could look at how many stores sell 
knitting yarn. 
 
!"Good, there are 3,000 specialty stores that sell knitting yarn.  Also some bigger stores, like 
Wal-Mart, sell a small selection of lower quality yarn. 
 
OK, then I would take a sample of these stores and estimate their sales of yarn and then 
extrapolate that over the remaining stores.  I would try to sample stores that are of typical size 
and revenues. 
 
!"OK, I have data on 3 stores.  The first is in Rhode Island and has $100,000 in annual 
revenues.  The second store is in Austin Texas in the owner’s garage.  Its revenues are 
$40,000.  The third store is in Massachusetts and has revenues of $170,000.   
 
I don’t know if these three are typical and is not a large enough sample to base the system on.  
Hmmmmm . . . . . . . . . .  I guess if each store stays in business it must be making money.  Maybe 
I can look at what it would take for each store to stay in business. 
 
!"Good, what expenses would a store like this have? 
 
Rent, Labor, Advertising, and the cost of the products. 
 
!"The mark-up on knitting supplies is about 100%, although with sale items it averages around 
60%.  Of the expenses, the variable costs make up about 50% of expenses.  What would be 
your estimates for an average size store’s expenses? 
 
Since these knitting shops are probably not in malls, and one was even in a garage, I would say 
the rent is fairly low, say $500 per month.  There are probably just a few workers that aren’t too 
well paid.  Maybe they are making $30,000 a year. 
 
!"Do you know what minimum wage is? 
 
OK, so maybe they make $15,000 a year.  Advertising would consist of just local ads in papers 
and maybe a knitting magazine.  I would guess that to be about $2,000 a year.  The sum of these 


===== PDF p111 =====
Estimation Cases 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
107 
costs is $38,000 per year.  If this is 50% of expenses, then the total costs would be $76,000.  So 
with their 60% markup it would be…. 
 
!"For simplicity just base your initial estimates on break-even. 
 
OK, then 3,000 stores that sell $76,000 annually, it comes to $228 million.  Wow that is bigger 
than I thought it would be. 
 
!"Actually the knitting yarn market is about $350 million.  Do you know why your numbers are 
understated? 
 
Well, actually I would say that my number is somewhat overstated because there are other 
supplies, such as knitting needles, patterns, etc that would be part of the sales.  But I also realize 
it is understated because we assumed break-even and I am sure most of these stores turn a profit 
or they would not stay in business.  Also, we only counted the sales at the specialty stores.  I 
ignored the sales at the Wal-Mart type stores. 
 
!"Good. 
 
 
How many people fly in and out of LaGuardia every day? 
 
My first attempt at this was to begin with the number of airlines that fly into/ out of LGA.  I then 
proceeded to try to figure out how many cities these airlines fly to from LGA.  This was nearly 
impossible to determine realistically.  I asked to try again and the interviewer said “good idea.” 
 
I looked at the problem again and realized it was a capacity problem.  No two planes could be on 
a runway at a given time and most likely had to be spaced by a few minutes for safety reasons.  
With this assumption, I continued to break the day into peak (7am-10am, 3pm-8pm), midpeak 
(10am-3pm) and off peak times (8pm-11pm).  I assumed no flights in the middle of the night.  I 
further assumed planes are spaced 5 minutes apart at peak hours, 10 minutes at midpeak and 15 
minutes apart during off peak times. 
 
Capacity assumptions assumed 100% at peak, 75% at mid peak, and 50% at off peak.  With an 
average plane holding 200 people, it would be (200 people/plane x 12 planes/hr x 8hrs) + (150 x 
6 x 5) + (100 x 4 x 3) = 24,900 people. 
 
With 2 runways, LaGuardia has roughly 50,000 people flying in and out every day. 
 
The feedback I got was good (moved onto the next round of interviews).  The interviewer told 
me he was looking for me to break the problem into peak and off peak times.  To be even better 
you could give an answer for weekdays and weekends (peak times shift). 
 
 
 
 
 
