===== PDF p52 =====
Table of Contents 
 
48
 
Practice Case 22: Auto consolidation  
(Mckinsey - Round 2) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:  
 
Your client is a company which has experienced growth in the past 
through acquisition.  It is composed of the following areas: 
 
Automotive parts ñ this has three different areas within the division 
Construction materials  
Automotive parts ñ this division owns four separate companies  
 
They would like you to identify consolidation and off-shoring 
opportunities 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:  
 
• 
Auto parts division #1 produces metallic parts and sells to OEMís 
• 
Construction materials division produces plumping, electrical, and 
other building materials.  Their customers are construction companies. 
• 
Auto parts division #3 produces rubber parts and sells to OEMís 
• 
The company does not operate any call centers 
• 
Auto businesses ship directly from its plants to customer plants (no 
warehouses) 
 
III. Sample solution 
 
I looked at areas of opportunity and then identified off shoring and 
consolidation opportunities for each area.  It was very important to identify 
levels at which consolidation can occur. 
 
Initial Structure: 
 
Cost (tailor to specific industries) 
SGA 
 
PPE 
 
Purchasing 
 
Other Operational 
 
 
Distribution 
 
 
Design Services 
 
 
Best Practices in general 
 
Revenue 
 
Cross-selling 
 


===== PDF p53 =====
Table of Contents 
 
49
Main opportunities are between auto areas.  Due to different automotive 
products, I recommend that automotive divisions remain separate, but there 
is opportunity to consolidate much of these businesses. 
 
Cost  
 
SGA 
Selling ñ Should consolidate sales forces across automotive divisions.  I 
would like to see a central director over both to ensure use of best practices.  
We should be able to have sales people who rep all of the rubber companies 
instead of individual reps for each subsidiary. 
G&A -  Accounting, Billing, Finance, should be consolidated to reduce cost 
and improve quality.  Billing, some accounting, and some finance can be sent 
to India.  This has been common in many industries and should not be 
difficult to accomplish. 
 
PPE 
Since much of SG&A is being consolidated we can combine some/all of our 
headquarters 
Utilization ñ We need to see where there is opportunity to consolidate and 
achieve high levels of manufacturing and design utilization (balanced with 
growth plans).  Main areas are across metallic auto, across rubber auto, and 
maybe minor opportunities with metallic auto and construction.   
Foot print rationalization  -  Balance this with customer locations/distribution 
and manufacturing costs.  Could be big opportunities to send manufacturing 
to China 
 
Purchasing 
This must be centralized to maximize our buyer power across all three areas 
and reduce headcount 
 
Other Operational 
Distribution -  Main opportunities between auto areas.  These divisions share 
customers.  Therefore, distribution network may have substantial 
opportunities for trucking/shipping.   
Design Services ñ Tied in to utilization tick.  Again consolidate within each of 
the auto areas and share best practices across both.  Offshore much of 
computer aided design and lower level engineering work that requires slightly 
less communication.  This should save you 50% where used and can also 
improve timing because you will have teams working around the clock. 
Best Practices in general ñ Structured product development process, etc 
 
Revenue 
Cross-selling in auto ñ Central director will help focus the sales team to 
leveraging contacts across areas.  You may be tempted to go to OEMís as 
central supplier and even offer integrated solutions, but this will not give you 
supplier power with them.  It would likely make you a bigger target for price 
givebacks.  Integrated solutions have been popular with the OEMís, but 


===== PDF p54 =====
Table of Contents 
 
50
suppliers are less profitable in these arrangements.  Therefore, I would keep 
separate rubber and metallic salespeople and products, but leverage network 
and best practices.  This set-up will be more like an in house manufacturerís 
representative 
