===== PDF p133 =====
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Prompt #1
Note – this is a very open-ended case, and will be driven mostly by the candidate. To make this a 
quality mock interview, the interviewer needs to be very familiar with the details of the case, and 
know when to (and when not to) give the candidate information. Please take the time to read the 
case IN DETAIL before giving it. 
It is October 2001, and our client is the New York City Economic Development Corporation (EDC). The 
EDC partners with a variety of governmental and non-governmental firms, serving as an engine for 
economic development.  The EDC is charged with leveraging the city’s assets to drive growth, create jobs 
and improve quality of life. Like a Chamber of Commerce, the EDC shapes policy for local business 
interests. The EDC is requesting our help in looking at the city’s hotel industry in the wake of the 
September 11th attacks. The EDC would like to know:
1. Can we quantify the expected impact of 9/11 on the New York City hotel industry?
2. Will the New York City hotel industry need government assistance?
Guidance
Ultimately, This is a profitability case. It requires (like some final round cases) a two part framework. First, 
the candidate should build a basic profit tree to take a look at the profitability of the NYC hotel industry prior 
to 9/11. Then, he/she should frame out (based on some assumptions) how 9/11 is expected to affect the 
industry’s future profitability.
1. Hopefully will not ask about cost structure of revenue before building a framework. If he/she does ask 
these detailed questions, simply say “we will get there later” and advise that he/she build a framework.
2. If the candidate asks what kind of assistance the EDC provides, or what kind of policies they try to 
influence, turn the question around and ask him or her what they think the EDC could do to advance 
local business interests. If the candidate is totally lost, give an example of lobbying for tax changes to 
stimulate purchases from local businesses.
3. If the candidate asks if we are talking about all of New York City or just Manhattan, say that we are 
considering all five boroughs. (This will matter later in terms of number of hotels, etc.)
Decision Round
129


===== PDF p134 =====
Guidance
As the candidate builds a framework, try to follow along to make sure he or she is not going off track, If so, 
this will become a pretty painful case. You may even have to prompt the candidate to focus on profitability, 
if he or she is completely lost.  This is “choose your own adventure.”
Once the candidate is finished with a framework, ask smart questions and push the candidate to improve 
his/her framework (if required) to progress through the case toward the goal.
The candidate’s framework should address:
Profitability of the NYC hotel industry before 9/11
a) Revenue is a function of number of rooms, occupancy rates, and average rate charged. The candidate 
may point out that some guests are travelling for business, while some are traveling for leisure. This is 
a great insight, and will matter later in the case.
b) Costs consist of FC, in the form of property, wages and salaries (almost all fixed in the hotel industry), 
insurance, and utilities, and VC (which includes items like room service, laundry, etc.). 
c) The candidate may key in on the fact that many hotels in NYC also generate revenue from restaurants 
and bars. While this is a great point, advise the candidate that to simplify the case, we will focus only 
on revenue generated by providing rooms to guests.
Modeled profitability of the NYC hotel industry after 9/11
a) This should be very similar to the first framework, with some modifications based on changes to 
occupancy, maybe changing room rates, etc.
Given the analysis of the change in profitability (based on 9/11) the candidate can then make a 
recommendation of whether or not the industry will need assistance.
The candidate should have a strong hypothesis. A good example would be:
“Yes, we can quantify the impact of 9/11 on the industry, by looking at profitability before and after 
9/11. We can then make a determination of whether or not assistance is needed by looking at the 
magnitude of the change in profitability, given the current financial health of the hotel industry.”
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Decision Round
130


===== PDF p135 =====
Guidance
The candidate should focus on profitability next.  If not, prompt them in this direction after a bit.
The candidate will likely ask about revenue and costs. Force him/her to be specific in these questions, and 
only provide the following information. If the candidate is uncomfortable making assumptions, you may 
have to say something like “we are in the early stages of working with the client, and just don’t have that 
much information.” If the candidate continues to push, you can suggest making some assumptions.
Revenue
a) There are 300 hotels in New York City
b) On average, each hotel has 250 rooms
c) The average nightly room rate is $300.00
d) Average nightly occupancy is 80%
Candidate to calculate nightly revenue of $18M for all NYC hotels
Costs - We don’t know anything about the NYC hotel industry’s cost structure. Ask the candidate to make 
some assumptions. 
a) Steer the candidate towards a 10% margin
b) The breakdown between FC and VC is also going to have to be an assumption. Keep in mind that the 
hotel industry has high fixed costs, and if necessary, point this out to the candidate.
For example, if the candidate assumes a 10% margin, nightly costs would be $16.2M
If the candidate assumes 80% of costs are FC, then nightly FC are roughly $13M, and nightly VC are 
roughly $3.2M
Candidate calculates nightly profit is $1.8M for the industry before 9/11
Note: The candidate should realizes that he or she will need the FC / VC breakdown in the next step. If the 
candidate jumps right to profit, let him or her continue, as costs will come up later…
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Decision Round
131


===== PDF p136 =====
Next Step
Now the candidate should be moving on to a model that will show how profitability will change based on 
9/11. In this case, we have no information, and you should let the candidate make assumptions. Use your 
best judgment (and the example below) to guide whether or not the candidate is making reasonable 
assumptions. 
Guidance
Obviously 9/11 had a significant impact on New York City, and effectively destroyed the local economy in 
the short term. The following example shows one way that the candidate could model the swing in 
profitability for the hotel industry:
Revenue
a) Assume a 50/50 split between business and leisure travelers looking for hotel rooms.
b) Assume that leisure travelers will simply chose not to come to NYC in the short term.
c) Assume that 50% of business travelers will still need a room, and the other 50% will cancel their trips.
d) Assume that average room rates will NOT change in the short term, and will stay at $300.00 per night.
This would result in $4.5M of nightly revenue from business travelers, and $0 of nightly revenue from 
leisure travelers, for a total of $4.5M per night.
Costs
a) Assuming that cost structures remain constant (from the last page) we have FC of $13M per night
b) VC are now $3.2M divided by 4 (based on the above assumptions), for updated VC of $800,000 per 
night.
c) Total costs are now 13.8M per night, and the industry is losing $9.3M every night.
The candidate should come up with a number between ($5M) and ($12M) for nightly profitability. Of 
course, the answer will change based on the assumptions the candidate makes. If his or her assumptions 
are even close to reasonable, the candidate should conclude that the industry is bleeding money, and 
badly needs help.
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Decision Round
132


===== PDF p137 =====
Next Step
Hopefully, now that the candidate has modeled the change in profitability for the industry, he or she is
ready to move on to the second question. Here the candidate should be looking at the fact that the industry 
badly needs help, and should be thinking of ways the EDC (and government) can help.
Guidance
The candidate should show sound business judgment and realize that this swing in profitability is HUGE, 
and that the industry is bleeding money. The next step is how the EDC can help.
To help in guiding the discussion that will follow:
1. If the candidate is stuck, or asks for direction, ask him/her “how do you think the EDC could help?” This 
should generate a discussion, and you are mostly applying common sense to the suggestions that the 
candidate will provide.
2. If the candidate asks about the current financial health of the industry, turn the question around and ask 
the same of him/her. The candidate may come up with:
a) There is a huge difference between an individual hotel and a chain (ability to sustain losses) 
because the chain will continue to generate revenue from its other locations
b) Certain areas will be hit harder, based on geographic proximity to the Twin Towers and the 
Financial District.
c) Some hotels may be uninhabitable in the short term.
3.
How can the EDC help?
a) It may be helpful to ask the candidate about the different levels of government (Federal, State, 
local) and how they could help the industry. 
b) Examples could be tax breaks, federal funding direct to individual hotels, a PR blitz to incentivize 
tourism, etc.
c) A strong candidate will bring up risks and other potential downsides associated with each strategy.
d) At this point, you are assessing the candidate’s creativity and business judgment. Keep the 
conversation moving until he or she is out of ideas.
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Decision Round
133


===== PDF p138 =====
Summary
Okay, great.  We just ran into the President of the EDC, and he would like an update on our 
progress. What would you say?
Guidance
Answers may vary significantly. Use common sense in evaluating the candidate’s ability to 
summarize the key things he or she looked at:
1. Profitability before 9/11
2. How we modeled profit after 9/11 (assumptions, etc) and what we learned
3. Does the industry need help? What kind of help should the EDC recommend?
4. Next steps: what would we look at if we had more time?
Case 16: NY Economic Development Corp.
Decision Round
134


===== PDF p139 =====
Performance 
Evaluation
Expected:
• Creates a MECE framework
• Asks intelligent questions about revenue and costs, to arrive at a solid estimate of profitability
• Correctly calculates profit pre-9/11
• Makes assumptions, and correctly models post-9/11 profits
• Comes up with 2 good ideas of how the EDC can help the industry
Good:
• Creates a framework that incorporates business and leisure travelers
• Is comfortable making assumptions, and makes logical assumptions that show solid business 
judgment
• Calculates profit quickly and accurately
• Provides most corrective actions listed with minimal prompting from the interviewer
• Shows business judgment by reacting to the numbers he or she calculates (the “so what”)
• Comes up with 4 or more good ideas of how the EDC can help the industry
Excellent:
• Framework addresses all subsequent questions in the case (at a top level)
• Very comfortable with making assumptions, “drives” the case even in the absence of information
• Speed and accuracy of computations
• Realizes that there is a difference between  individual hotels and chains, with regard to ability to 
sustain losses based on short term decreases in revenue
• Realizes that the hotel industry has high fixed costs, and sees the second order impact of this 
cost structure
• Thinks about governmental policies that could actually solve this problem, and lists them in a 
logical, MECE manner
• Comes up with “outside the box” ideas like using hotel rooms to house first responders who are 
working at the Twin Towers
Case 16: NY Economic Development 
Corp.`
Decision Round
135
