===== PDF p34 =====
CASE 15:  EXPLOSIVES (BCG – Round 2)         
 
 
Our client is a large manufacturer of explosive products.  Recently, their largest customer, a 
mining company, has called for a competitive bid for their next 3 year contract.  Previously, we 
have been their preferred provider and have run uncontested.  Our client wants to know how 
we should price the bid. 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• Our client provides three products: 
1. Ammonium nitrate (AN) which is used to create the explosion 
2. Ignition systems (IS) used to start the explosion 
3. Slot services which are contracting services designed to help clients understand where to 
place explosives. 
 
• When asked why the bid was put out for RFP, the answer was that we are not sure but suspect it 
could be internal cost pressures. 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
Q:  I’d like to take a look at this by first analyzing the external factors currently impacting our client 
(what the needs of the mining firm have been in the past and are now, what the competitive 
landscape looks like, and how the industry’s product mix breaks down).  Then I’d like to do an 
internal analysis of the various options available to our client focusing largely on drivers of 
profitability.  To start, what do we know about this mining firm and their current contract? 
A:  The mining firm owns two mines, one in Kentucky and one in Wyoming.  Previously, 80% of 
the revenue of their contract has been derived from AN and 20% from IS.  They don’t purchase 
any slot services as they have their own people? 
 
Q:  You mentioned the contract from a revenue perspective but do we know what they purchased from 
a volume perspective and at what cost? 
A:  They purchased 40,000 tons of AN at $1000 per ton and IS at $250 per ton of AN (there is a 
predetermined ratio of how much IS you need per ton of AN). 
 
Q: Great.  Next I’d like to understand a little bit more about the competitive landscape.  Do we know 
anything about new competitors that have entered the market and how we compare to those firms? 
A: Nothing has changed from a competitive standpoint as we have the same competitors as always.  
We are generally seen as the market and price leader. 
 
Q: From a product standpoint, how do we compare to those competitors? 
A: AN is pretty much a commodity although we do charge about a $10 premium over our 
competitors.  From an IS standpoint, we are the clear leader and have a quality product for which 
people will pay for. 
 
Q:  Do all competitors provide both products? 
A: Our largest competitor does although they have bad ignition systems.  There are other 
competitors for ignition system abroad that are closer in quality to ours and AN can be purchased 
from many places as it is a commodity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29


===== PDF p35 =====
 
 
 
30
Interviewee’s Solution (cont.): 
 
Q: Great.  Now that I know more about the industry landscape, I’d like to look at the current and 
future profitability of this contract.  We know that the client purchased 40,000 tons of AN at $1,000 
per ton so that is $40 million in revenue.  They also purchased IS at $250 per ton of AN so that is $10 
million in revenue for a total of $50 million.  Do we know the margins on these products? 
A:  Yes, AN gets a 20% margin and IS get an 80% margin. 
 
Q: That means that we are making $8 million of profit off of each component of the contract currently.  
What are the specifics of the future contract? 
A:  It will be for the same components in the same volumes as this contract.  
 
Q:  Since, the contract is the same as last time, we need to think about who we are really competing 
against to determine price.  In this case, it seems that no competitor offers as robust an offering as we 
do.  However, the customer still has the option to purchase the products separately on their own.  Do 
we know how much they could save by doing so?  Also, what would it cost them in internal costs to 
manage the process? 
A: They could get the next closest IS system to ours for $100 per ton cheaper by purchasing 
overseas.  Additionally, let’s assume that they need 1 person @$100k per year to manage the process.  
 
Q:  That means they will save $4 million per year on their own although they probably won’t want to 
do it. 
A: If you think they don’t want to do it, should we charge them more for our integrated service. 
 
Q: I wouldn’t advertise that to the customer even if we do decide to do it because it is poor positioning.  
Also, when looking at the number, we could make $16 million in profit so by looking at the scope, I’m 
not sure another $100k matters. 
A: Agreed.  So what should we do? 
 
Q:  Well, since AN is a commodity and since we make a much smaller margin on it, I’m not attracted 
to trying to reduce price there.  However, as we make a much higher margin on IS, and it would be 
much harder for them to get these products from abroad, that may be a good place to reduce price if 
that is the mine’s number 1 concern.   
A:  That makes sense.  So what should we price it at? 
 
Q:  Working backwards, I’m not sure that we necessary need to give an entire $4 million price 
concession to our client as they do know that we have a premium product.  Instead, let’s reduce our 
price by half that so that the maximum they will pay is $8 million for IS systems.  That makes the 
price $200 per ton.  Does that seem reasonable? 
A: It does. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
