===== PDF p15 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
PROFIT IMPROVEMENT  
 
UNIFORM RENTAL COMPANY 
 
Part I - Question 
 
Your client owns a business that rents uniforms to other businesses (hotels, restaurants, mechanics, etc).  They 
provide the uniforms to the client every morning, collect them at the end of the day, clean them and iron them and 
deliver them again the next morning.  This business currently spends 400 million dollars a year in suppliers to make 
their uniforms, how would you recommend they cut these costs. 
 
Part 1 : Possible Approach 
 
Reduce the number of suppliers to get higher discounts 
Use closer suppliers to reduce transportation cost 
Focus on the fewer industries (hospitals) to reduce the variety of supplies and get volume discounts 
Use different materials (better quality fabric to last longer or cheaper fabric) 
Refurbish uniforms 
Vertical integration, (buy the supplier, start up a factory, join venture) 
  
Part 2- Question 
 
Evaluate and choose one of the following options: 
1. 
Reduce the number of suppliers by 1/3 (the suppliers have agreed to give an 8% discount for every 100% 
increase in the order size or its equivalent) 
2. 
Establish a contract to buy a fixed number per year to only one supplier for a 16% discount. 
 
Part 2: Possible Approach 
 
A 1/3 reduction of suppliers would translate into a 50% increase in the order size per supplier or a 4% discount, this 
multiplied by 400 million would give us a reduction in costs of 16 million. 
 
The second option would give a discount of 16% that would translate to a 20 million reduction in costs.  Solely by 
the numbers this option is better. 
  
It is important to mention that the second option would mean that the company has to order the same number every 
year, and if they need more they have to buy at market price and if they need less they still have to buy the same 
amount which produces losses.  If you go by option one, and reduce the number of suppliers by 2/3 instead, then you 
would get the same 16% discount of the second option without the need to buy a fixed amount every year.  So the 
first option is better if you can reduce the suppliers by 2/3  (assuming you can get all that you need from only one 
third of the suppliers). 
 
 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 41 
 
