===== PDF p37 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 33 - 
Case7: Ducati 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Arthur D. Little 
Round: 2007 Full-Time, First Round 
Content: Qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is Ducati, a leader Italian producer of motorcycles. They produce high-end 
motorbikes which they sell globally. They have 150 stores, 50 stores are single brand 
(they only sell Ducati) and the remaining 100 store are multi brand (they sell between 3 
and 8 different brands of motorbikes). Multi-brand stores have similar sales and income 
figures, while single brand stores are either huge success or on the verge of bankruptcy. 
(A single brand store in Italy did so badly that the owner killed himself after bankruptcy.) 
 
They hired ADL because they want to identify the major reasons of this diversity and 
find a way to decrease the number of underperforming single brand store. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: A rock star interviewee will list the major possible 
differences between single-brand (SB) and multi-brand (MB) store and then will ask 
question in order to focus on the most important. After identifying the most important 
differences the candidate should suggest any reasonable recommendation to identify 
opportunities for SB store. 
 
Key facts:   
The main factors are cross-selling and customer brand recognition 
 Brand recognition 
o Ducati has not yet established customer loyalties in most of the countries 
where it sells; in US for example there is not yet customer captivity for Ducati 
bikers (Ducatisti) 
 Cross-selling 
o Ducati does not risk loosing a loyal customer when they shop at a MB stores 
o There are several loyal customers who discovered Ducati trough MB store and 
then remained loyal 
o The best SB store can be found near competitor stores or in region where MB 
stores are present, especially near MB stores selling several brands (7 or 8) 
 


===== PDF p38 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 34 - 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer: So, tell me how would you structure this problem? 
 
Interviewee:  Our client asked us to identify the main reasons for such a disparity 
between SB and MB stores and give a suggestion once they found key issues. 
 
It is an interesting and complex case. May I take a second to structure a proper analysis? 
 
Interviewer: Sure. 
 
Interviewee:  Ok, these are the aspects I want to analyze: 
 
 Geography: Are underperforming SB located in particular areas (urban/suburban) 
or countries (EU/USA/ASIA)? 
 Customers: Did Ducati target the right customers in each area they are positioning 
a new SB? 
 Managers: Is the Ducati relationship with SB managers different from MB 
managers? 
 Stores: Is there any major difference between SB and MB stores in terms client 
mix?  
 
Interviewer: The distribution of underperforming SB stores is uniform among cities, 
suburban areas and different countries. 
 
Ducati has a clear value proposition and the customers’ analysis is well structured. 
Ducati treat MB and SB store managers in the same way. Once a new store manager 
(either SB or MB) decides to open a new store, he or she asks Ducati to supply its 
motorbikes; Ducati decides to accept or not this new distributor considering 
strategic/location factors. No further consideration is made based on the nature of the 
store (MB versus SB). 
 
Your fourth point is the most important one. What do you think is the major difference 
between MB and SB? How do you imagine these two kinds of stores?  
 
Interviewee:  Let me think a little bit. I think that the major differences between MS and 
SB stores are: 
 Size: SB are smaller than MB 
 Customers: SB attracts mostly Ducati enthusiast or curious customers, while MS 
attract every kind of customers who are thinking about buying a new motorbike 
 Managers and Operations: a SB manager is most likely an enthusiast Ducati user 
but not necessary a good seller, while a MB manager is most likely to be an 
experienced manager and seller 


===== PDF p39 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 35 - 
 Traffic: obviously MB stores attract way more customers than SB. Most likely, 
the more brands they sell the bigger is the traffic 
 
Interviewer: Very good. These are main differences. We initially thought from ice 
creams, high-end motorbike sales are uncorrelated from store traffic. Evidence showed 
the opposite. Surprisingly, we have noticed that SB store with higher traffic are most 
likely to perform better. Do you think you can analyze the possible reasons? 
 
Interviewee:  Yes. I think is probably a problem of brand recognition. Most likely 
potential loyal customers in some regions are not aware of the experience of riding a 
Ducati. Probably they have never seen one. 
 
Interviewer: That is possible. How would you identify one or more indicators to analyze 
SB stores traffic without actually visit them? 
 
Interviewee:  I would look to the SB stores located in area where enthusiasm for motor 
bikes is higher. I think that the best way is to look at competitors and MB stores’ 
locations.  May I ask whether or not there is any geographic correlation between the 
distribution of performing SB stores and MB stores? Are they in the same areas? Are top 
SB stores located near competitors? 
 
Interviewer: I think we are close to the solution of problem. Yes, you are right. We have 
analyzed the distribution of the best SB stores and they are localized close to competitors 
or MB stores. We have also noticed that the bigger the MB store the higher is the 
performance of SB store. What can you infer from that? 
 
Interviewee:  I think that cross-selling and traffic are the best way to increase brand 
recognition and eventually SB performances. 
 
Interviewer: That makes sense. So, what would you suggest to Ducati CEO? 
 
Interviewee:  I would suggest to localize all the areas in which there is a major 
distribution of MB and competitors stores. Ducati should invest in creating new  SB 
stores and showrooms in these areas so to leverage the brand recognition created by the 
MB stores and increase sales. 
 
Interviewer: Very good. We appreciate your analysis. 
 
 
