===== PDF p36 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
32 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Medium 
Company: BCG 
 
 
9.4 Consumer ADSL Services 
 
ADSL  is  a  technology that   enables   the   implementation of 
broadband Internet services via the existing telephony 
infrastructure. This telephony infrastructure is owned by the 
incumbent telecom operator in Norway. As in most European 
countries, the regulator has ruled that new entrants may offer 
ADSL services, using the existing incumbent-owned telephony 
infrastructure via MDF access. This means, the  new  entrant can 
hire the copper wire from the incumbent operator but has    to 
purchase its own ADSL equipment. 
 
The technical set-up that a new entrant would need in order      to 
establish an ADSL connection basically consists of three 
elements: MDF access (copper wire), ADSL equipment, Internet 
uplink capacity (fiber  access  connecting  the ADSL equipment to 
the Internet). 
 
The costs involved in establishing the technical set-up are given 
(amounts have been converted to Euros): 
• MDF access tariff is EUR 12 per line per month, 
set by the regulator 
• Required investments for the ADSL equipment is EUR 120,000 
per location, depreciation period of 5 years. For simplicity 
reasons we assume linear depreciation with no interest costs. 
In total, there are 250 locations where ADSL equipment could 
be installed, covering all households in Norway 
• Internet uplink capacity is commercially available. Depending 
on the required end-user speed, costs are on average EUR 2 
per end-user per month 
• For simplicity reasons, we assume that the consumer ADSL 
modem is client-owned. 
 
Suppose you wanted to assess if a new entrant can run a profitable 
business in offering consumer ADSL services, how would you 
approach this? 
 
Let’s see, since we are considering a new entrant, who has initially 
no customers, the company will at first generate loss, and 
gradually will become more profitable as the number of customers 
increases. I could make some assumptions on the pace at which 
the customer base will grow, but rather than making this too 
complex at the beginning, I would start by calculating some sort of 
break-even point. I mean, if we never reach break-even, this idea 
will certainly not fly. 
 
I: Sounds good, how would you calculate the break-even point? 
C: Hmmm, we know all the costs, but we don’t know the revenue, 
which would be price times number of customers. So I could 
assume a price and then calculate the number of customers 
we need. Subsequently, I would need to check if the required 
number of customers would be a reasonable number. Do we 
know anything about the price? 
 
 
I: We know that the incumbent charges on average EUR 20 
per month. 
C: OK, let’s assume we could also ask EUR 20 to start with. Later 
we may need to reconsider this and see if we need to lower the 
price in order to become more competitive. So let’s see    if we 
can calculate this… hmmm, wait, I see we have a lot     of 
information on technical costs, but I don’t see anything on 
personnel costs, is this correct? 
 
I: Well spotted, we also need an organization and a small 
marketing budget. The new entrant has done some pre-work 
and has calculated that an annual budget of EUR 4.8 million 
would be sufficient to cover the entire country. 
C: OK, then I can calculate the break-even point. Per customer, 
the new entrant earns EUR 20, of which it uses EUR 14        to 
cover the expenses for MDF access and the Internet uplink. 
That means he has EUR 6 per customer per month to cover all 
other costs. We write off the ADSL equipment in 5 years, so 
that’s EUR 2,000 per month per location. For 250 locations 
that’s EUR 500,000 per month. In addition, we have to cover the 
organizational costs, which is EUR 400,000 per month. So for 
break-even we need EUR 900,000/EUR 6=150,000 customers. 
 
After the basic set-up of the case, the interviewer assesses the 
candidate’s ability to make some basic assumptions in order      to 
get to the next level (Judgment) and play around a little bit with that 
to see if the candidate can really see through the drivers     of the 
case (Synthesis). 
 
I:  OK, so what do you think, is that a realistic number to achieve? 
Let me add that we have roughly 2 million households in Norway. 
C: Hmmm, let’s see...at first sight, 150,000 out of 2 million does 
not seem impossible, but I would like to know a bit more about 
the market. For instance: is there a lot of growth in the market? 
How many competitors are there? Can you tell me a bit more 
about that? 
 
I: Yes, at the time of this situation, the incumbent operator was still 
the only provider of ADSL services in Norway, but others have 
considered entering the market, just as we are doing now. The 
distribution was as follows: 20% of the households had ADSL 
services, 20% used Broadband via cable, 50% still used dial-
up and 10% had no Internet. We know that these percentages 
were established in 5 years time. That is: 5 years before no 
broadband Internet existed. We have no data from in-between 
years. 
C: OK… so that’s a fast growing market. I would say we start 
focusing on acquiring new  customers  from  the  group  that is 
currently using dial-up, since this is the largest group and since 
it is probably easier to acquire new customers than 


===== PDF p37 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to persuade customers from our competitors to switch. Now,  if 
we would take a situation for instance 5 years later and if we 
assume that by then the market has grown again with roughly 
the same amount, the  ADSL  market  increases  from  20% to 
40%, which means 400,000 new households will subscribe to 
ADSL. We would be competing for these clients, against the 
incumbent operator, and maybe some other new entrants as 
you mentioned. So… let’s say the incumbent operator gets at 
least a 50% share of that, since it has a strong presence in the 
market already. Let’s assume we would be competing against 
1 or 2 other competitors, which means we could get 17–25% 
share of the new customers, or  ~70,000–100,000  in total. So 
it seems that it won’t be possible to reach break-even from new 
customers only. We could also have a look at the existing 
customers, both ADSL and cable customers. But then I would 
need to know how likely it is that they would switch? 
 
I: OK, that is something you may want to investigate. But what 
would be your upfront judgment on this?” 
C: I can imagine that customers would want to switch if they are 
very unsatisfied with the current service, or if the new entrant 
would offer a much lower price. Do we know anything about 
customer satisfaction? 
 
I: Most customers are very satisfied, the service is very reliable. 
C: OK, so let’s look at lowering the price. For instance a 10% 
discount... Hmm... but that would mean we also would need 
more customers to reach break-even. A 10% discount means 
we drop from EUR 20 to EUR 18 contributing EUR 4 per 
customer instead of EUR 6 to the fixed costs. So we would 
need 225,000 customers in this case. Even if we could get     a 
greater share from new customers, I still think it would be 
unrealistic to assume we  could  persuade  a  large  number of 
customers to switch for a EUR 2 discount, particularly if they are 
satisfied with the current service. In addition, there’s the risk that 
our competitors would lower their prices too. Concluding, I 
would say this is a risky business to step into. 
 
When the basics of the case have been cracked, the interviewer 
would finally test if the candidate is able to assess the problem 
from different angles and if he/she can come up with alternative 
solutions (Creativity). If the case runs smoothly and there’s time 
left, the  candidate can  even  quantify part  of these alternative 
solutions. 
 
I: I agree. The way we have been looking at it, the business case 
looks very challenging indeed. But let’s spend a minute to see if 
we can come up with some creative ideas here. Could you think of 
some ideas that would make this business case more attractive? 
C: I was struck by the negative effect a slight price decrease has. 
So, I was thinking: could we somehow increase the price? 
Of course, this can only be justified by offering better service. 
Would it be possible to increase the speed, for instance? 
I: Yes, technically this would be possible. You would need to make 
sure that you buy enough capacity on the Internet uplink. Let’s 
assume the speed you can offer is directly proportional to the 
capacity you buy and the costs associated with it. 
C: OK, so doubling the speed would increase the cost per 
subscriber by EUR 2 per month, while we could probably 
charge a much higher tariff, maybe EUR 30 or so. If we could 
diversify our offering, and if part of the customers subscribe  to 
the premium packages, this would certainly improve the case. 
Furthermore, I am considering offering additional services, like 
telephony or even video services if that’s possible. Of course 
we would need to make a separate business case for that, but 
since EUR 12 out of the 20 we charge is spent on MDF access, 
any other service we can offer, which re-uses this asset, would 
greatly improve the case. I mean, we would spread our largest 
cost component across multiple services. 
 
I: OK, sounds like these ideas are worth investigating. Anything 
else you can think of? 
C: What about starting in a limited number of regions, instead    of 
covering the entire country from the start? Is the number   of 
customers per location equal across the country? 
 
I: Good point! The area of each region is more or less the same, 
which means… 
C: You have a huge variation in the number of households per 
location. If we pick the high density areas, for instance the Oslo 
area, plus some other larger cities, we can perhaps reach 50% 
of the households through, I don’t know, maybe only 20% of the 
locations and thus only 20% of the ADSL equipment cost. That 
would make a difference. 
 
I: You’re absolutely right, and you know, looking back this is 
exactly what new entrants have done when entering the ADSL 
market: start in high density areas, offer higher speeds at 
premium prices, in particular to small and medium-sized 
enterprises, and – at a later stage – expand the service by 
offering additional services. 
