===== PDF p107 =====
Business Type Cases (abbreviated answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
103 
You work at a large company, which has many divisions.  Each division uses different brands of 
computers and software packages.  As the new head of procurement at corporate headquarters, 
how would you go about convincing the divisions to adopt a common standard if you do not have 
the power or authority to force the change? What advantages would there be if there were a 
unified standard? 
 
One Approach: 
 
The obvious answer is that there would be cost savings from buying computers in bulk.  Imagine 
each division needs 25 computers and each picks up the phone and calls around.  Not much 
buying power.  If you were instead representing the entire company and called around for quotes 
on 1,000 computers, you could probably get a much better price.  This is a simple marketing 
concept: power of the buyer.  This would also extend to software licenses, etc. 
 
However, the better answer would then examine more closely the true cost of computer usage.  
While there would indeed be savings from buying in larger numbers, the majority of cost 
associated with a computer appears after you open the box.  Just think back when you bought 
your computer for Columbia - in addition to the actual computer you had to buy software, cables, 
PC-cards, etc.  And imagine if you had to pay $$$ each time you visited the computer desk.  And 
don’t forget all the training costs associated with teaching people how to use their computers, etc. 
 
In a large corporation, the major cost associated with computers is probably from tech support.  
A $5k laptop is nothing compared to the annual salary of a tech support guy.  In this hypothetical 
company, apparently each division has its own help desk.  Corporate could consolidate these help 
desks and save money that way.  If you remember queuing theory from Operations, you could 
argue you would need fewer tech support people since each could now help any employee.  
 
So if the division agreed to follow a unified standard they would receive substantial benefits.  
They would spend less on the hardware and software because of increased buying power.  They 
would also save money from not having to support their own help desks.  In addition to cost 
savings, they would probably also receive quicker and better computer support. 
 
EXTRA: What my interviewer seemed to really like is that I used as a framework the computer 
situation at my previous employer.  I worked at a large firm and my division had its own 
computer policy.  The other divisions in the company used Compaqs and Win95.  However, my 
division wanted to use IBM Thinkpads.  The compromise was that we would use Compaqs and 
OS/2.  The rumor was that the golfing buddy of our division 
president was high up in IBM.  We had our own help desk, which had to develop special 
applications that would work in OS/2, etc.  The line was always busy between 9 am and 1 PM 
since that was when we needed to place in trades (and therefore use our computers).  And after 1 
PM the help desk usually just sat around.  For a framework I just used the above points in 
reference to what was going on at my old firm. 
