===== PDF p77 =====
 
©2008 Tuck Consulting Club. All rights reserved. 
                      72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tuck Consulting Club  
Snap, Crackle, Pop  
Case Description:  This case challenges one to consider the steps a firm must take in deciding 
whether to introduce a product innovation into the market.  It requires you to analyze the overall 
market and supply chain for instant popcorn before drilling into specifics about the effects of a new 
product introduction for a supplier to the popcorn market.  
 
Inventory: [no exhibits]  
Industry: Manufacturing  
 
Potential applicable frameworks:  
 
Profitability 
3 C’s 
Value Chain 
Microecon. Analysis 
Market Entry 
4 P’s 
Supply Chain 
Internal / External 
Competitive Threat 
Porter’s 5 Forces     Market Sizing 
Other 
 
 
Introduction  
 
Our client is a supplier to the microwavable popcorn industry.  They supply popcorn makers (e.g. Act 
II, Orville Redenbacher’s, etc.) with the grease resistant paper used to package popcorn  
kernels in a variety of serving sizes.  In this industry, the quality of the paper is determined by placing a 
bag of freshly micro-waved popcorn on a napkin and measuring the amount of grease that seeps 
through the paper packaging and is absorbed by the napkin.  
The R&D department of our client recently developed a new type of paper that doubles the  
performance of the paper. A new type of coating is applied to the paper that virtually eliminates any 
seepage of grease in the napkin test.  
 
Question 1: Should our client introduce this new product into the market?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p78 =====
 
©2008 Tuck Consulting Club. All rights reserved. 
                      73 
 
 
 
 
 
Snap, Crackle, Pop (continued)  
Case Details  
 
Question 1: Should our client introduce this new product into the market?  
 
 
Info to be given if asked:  
 
•  What is the overall market size?  
 
o  Overall volume in the market is 100 million sheets of grease resistant paper  
 
per year.  
 
•  What is the competition in this market?  
 
o  There our 4 players who supply paper in this market.  Our client holds the  
 
largest market share (i.e. 50%), and with rest of market share split evenly  
 
among the rest of our competitors.  Market share for all players has been  
 
stable over the last decade.  
 
•  How did our client achieve the larger market share?  
o  They were the first mover into the market.  
 
•  Is there any difference between the paper supplied by our client and our competitors?  
o  All players have been producing and supplying essentially the same type and  
 
quality of paper since microwavable popcorn was introduced  
 
•  Is there a history of innovations in the grease-resistant paper market?  
o    All players have been producing and supplying essentially the same type and  
 
quality of paper since microwavable popcorn was introduced.  
 
• 
Is there any threat of the popcorn makers vertically integrating? 
o  Not really, popcorn makers differentiate on brand and are not really interested 
in entering production of what is essentially a commodity product. 
 
• 
Is there pricing pressure evident in this market? 
o  Prices have been relatively stable over the last decade, though recently there 
has been some increasing pressure as the retail price for microwavable 
popcorn has been dropping. 
 
 
 


===== PDF p79 =====
 
©2008 Tuck Consulting Club. All rights reserved. 
                      74 
 
 
 
 
 
Snap, Crackle, Pop (continued)  
 
•   Will our client’s customers be able to differentiate themselves by using the new paper  
 
with increased grease resistance?  Will they derive a competitive advantage?  
o  They have not had direct conversations with the popcorn makers.  They did  
 
however run some initial focus groups with end-customers (i.e. buyers of  
 
popcorn), and found the amount of grease that seeps through paper is not a  
 
concern for buyers and introducing the new paper will not necessarily sway  
 
consumer’s buying decision.  
 
 
•  Will producing the new paper require a large capital investment?  
o  The cost of setting up the new production will be minimal.  
 
• 
Will the new paper increase our client’s raw material costs (e.g. thicker paper, more 
coating, etc)? 
o  It currently costs our client $0.10 to produce each sheet of paper for an  
individual package of popcorn.  The chemicals in the coating of the new paper 
increase the cost of a sheet by 20% to $0.12.  
 
•  Will our customer’s clients incur any additional costs to setup their production  
 
process to accommodate the new type of paper?  
 
o  They will not incur any extra costs in the production/packaging process.  In  
 
fact, they will actually be able to save some money by using the new paper.  
 
The old paper required that popcorn makers to glue two sheets of paper  
 
together before packaging in order to achieve the desired grease resistance.  
 
The new paper allows popcorn makers to eliminate this step in the production  
 
process that previously added $0.12 to their total packaging costs.  
Total Packaging Costs for Popcorn Makers  
Old    New  
Grease Resistant Sheets Needed 
2 
1 
Cost per Sheet 
$0.20 
? 
Cost to Glue Sheets 
$0.12 
$0.00 
Total Packaging Costs 
$0.52 
? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p80 =====
 
©2008 Tuck Consulting Club. All rights reserved. 
                      75 
 
 
 
 
 
Snap, Crackle, Pop (continued)  
Recommended Solution  
 
Question 1 Details  
•   Interviewer should identify that talking to your client’s customers (i.e. popcorn  
 
makers) would be the first step  
 
•   Realize that increasing the total packaging cost for popcorn makers to utilize the new  
 
paper in their packaging operations is not an option  
 
•   Realize that introducing the new paper will cut our client’s volume by 50%  
 
•   Come up with a pricing strategy that will allow our client to maintain existing  
profitability, or potentially increase profitability by reducing total packaging costs for 
popcorn makers and increasing market share.  
Overall Recommendations  
 
A good answer includes:  
•   Identifies that seeking input from your client’s customers is a critical step  
•   Recognizes that the new paper adds minimal value to the end customer and thus will  
 
not help popcorn makers differentiate themselves  
•   Analyzes the supply chain to come to the conclusion that a the new paper will lead to  
 
a 50% drop in volume if our client maintains the same market share  
 
A better answer includes:  
•   Recommends a specific price that our client should set to maintain profitability at  
 
current volume (i.e. $0.52)  
•   Highlights that our client will have to pre-sell this innovation with clients over time as  
 
they will probably not be amenable to what they may perceive as a $0.32 price  
 
increase  
A superior answer includes:  
•   Recommends a specific price range that will allow the client to increase its market  
 
share and profitability by lowering the total packaging cost for popcorn makers in a  
 
retail market with increasing pricing pressure  
•   Identifies additional steps our client will have to take to ensure it can capitalize on  
 
this opportunity (e.g. patent protection, sales and marketing, etc.)  
•   A superior answer should also quickly realize that the rationale for the product  
introduction is driven by cost reductions for popcorn makers vs. demand creation in the 
retail market.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
