===== PDF p33 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
28 
10. Apparel Outsourcing  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Type of Case: Operations, Outsourcing, Cost reduction 
Difficulty: High 
 
Opening 
 
Our client sells women’s apparel in the US market.  They are known as a low-cost competitor 
and sell their apparel through multiple outlets and retail stores.  They are looking at several 
options to cut costs even further and they’d like our opinion on how they can do that.  
 
They currently manufacture products in two plants, one in the US (Ohio) and one in 
Guatemala.  A third party vendor in China supplies the remainder of their demand.   
 
They are thinking of closing the US plant and want us to determine if this is a good idea, If so, 
where should they move their operations to worldwide? 
 
Background and Areas of Discussion 
 
Several frameworks will work for this.  However, in the end this is a cost cutting case so at 
some point the interviewee should look at some sort of Cost/Benefit analysis by location and 
keep in mind what are the client’s core competencies and strengths are. 
 
For example: 
The Company:   
• Current state of sales:  Growing or Shrinking:   
(The interviewee should ask this to get a feel for future productions needs.) 
• What are their major cost drivers?  
(Labor, Materials, Shipping, etc….Let the interviewee come up with these on their 
own.) 
• What is their product truly know for?  
(As said in the intro...Low-Cost competitor.) 
• Are they currently delivering that strength to their customers? (Yes) 
• What are the risks in closing the US plant, aside from costs?  
(Lead the interviewee to come up with things like bad press, labor negotiations, closing 
costs, increased shipping costs, etc) 
 
Revenues and costs  
• What are the revenues and costs of their current US production facility in order to get a 
baseline on what closing the US plant will save them. 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p34 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
29 
10. Apparel Outsourcing continued…  
 
 
 
 
Locations: 
• New Locations for the US production and do a Cost/Benefit analysis of each. 
• Other locations besides current places?  
(Vietnam, India, Philippines, South America, Etc) 
• Other vendors in China?   
(If the interviewee is stuck on getting more outsourcing from China since the client is 
already outsourcing there, draw their attention back to the costs in China compared to 
both the US and Guatemala.) 
• Other plants in Guatemala?...Go to Part 2 
 
Part One: Current State Analysis: 
All three producers produce completely equivalent product.  There are no quality issues or 
differences between US, Guatemala, and China production 
 
The US plant is over 15 years old.  Its equipment is old and fully depreciated.  Maintenance 
costs have been increasing significantly the last few years as the equipment continues to age. 
 
The Guatemala plant is relatively new and in good shape.  
 
The Interviewee should ask for the following pieces of data.  This data should only be given 
when asked for.  The interviewee should be able to construct an organized table like the one 
shown below. 
 
 
COSTS ($/unit) 
 
Current 
Production  
Total 
Capacity
Mfg. Costs
(all inc.) 
Distribution 
Tariffs 
US 
125,000 
150,000
$6.00 
$0.50 
$0.00 
Guatemala 
40,000 
50,000
$4.00 
$1.00 
$0.50 
China 
35,000 
40,000
$3.00 
$2.00 
$2.00 
 
 
Part Two: Alternate production Possibilities: 
• There are 10 other apparel manufacturers with plants in Guatemala.   
• Half of the 10 plants have approximately 1/3 excess capacity each.   
• Using this excess capacity would result in nearly the same costs as the client currently 
gets from their own Guatemalan plant.   
• The 5 plants with capacity break down as follows: 
o P1) 10K units excess capacity, 
o P2) 20K  
o P3) 15K  
o P4) 25K  
o P5) 10K 
 


===== PDF p35 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
30 
10. Apparel Outsourcing continued…  
 
 
 
 
Analysis  
 
First, the interviewee should construct a table resembling the one shown in the “Background” 
section. 
 
Part One: Current state analysis: 
 
The Interviewee should calculate  
A) Total costs per product per supplier:  
• The Chinese vendor is the most costly at $7.00/unit 
• The US currently costs $6.50/unit 
• Guatemala is the lease expensive at $5.50/unit 
 
B) If the US plant is closed, its 125K units of production cannot be accommodated by 
Guatemala and China.  The other two vendors can currently accommodate only 15K units from 
the US. 
 
Part Two: Alternate production Possibilities: 
 
The next step is to ask the Interviewee where they would find the excess capacity to account 
for the lost US production of 125K units.  Answers could include expanding the Guatemala 
plant, leveraging the contact in China to find new outsourcing resources, looking at other 
apparel plants in Guatemala for their excess capacity, or seeing outsourcers in other emerging 
markets (Vietnam, India, Philippines, South America, Etc) If the interviewee is stuck on 
getting more outsourcing from China since the client is already outsourcing there, draw their 
attention back to the costs in China compared to both the US and Guatemala.   
 
C) The interviewee should calculate how much capacity the five other plants in Guatemala can 
provide: 
10K units excess capacity + 20K + 15K + 25K + 10K = 80K units’ total of capacity  
 
D) Determine if this capacity is enough to handle completely closing the US plant: 
(125K units from US) – (15K units placed in current production locations) – (80K units placed 
in other Guatemalan plants) = 30K units remaining to be placed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p36 =====
Torch the Case 2008 
 
31 
10. Apparel Outsourcing continued…  
 
 
 
 
Recommended Conclusion.  
 
Suggested recommendations to the CEO: 
Close the US plant and move as much production as you can to Guatemala. 
 
However, what are the risks upsides with closing the plant?  
 
(1) Retire old equipment and save excess maintenance costs (case is clear about this one). (2) 
Profit from sale of the plant building? Are there any dollars from selling the building that can 
be redirected to Guatemala? It does not have to be specific, but should come up in discussion. 
 
An example summary: 
“After examining the costs of producing at your US plant, your Guatemala plant and your 
current China outsourcing arrangement we feel it would be beneficial to close your US Plant.  
Even though this may produce some bad press in the US, your costs are much less elsewhere.  
Specifically, your Guatemala plant has low costs and we recommend moving all of your 
operations there.  We realize that your current plant arrangement cannot handle all of the US 
production, so we recommend retrofitting your Guatemala plant to handle approx half the US 
capacity, and source the remaining half from other manufacturing sites in Guatemala.  During 
the year that the plant is being retrofitted capacity can either be bought from other vendors in 
Guatemala, at a premium, or do phased closing of the US plant to handle the leftover 
production.  A study on the costs of retrofitting the plant vs. purchasing additional production 
from vendors would need to be undertake and we would be happy to help you with that.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
