===== PDF p67 =====
Table of Contents 
 
63
Practice Case 28: Antique store  
(AT Kearney - Round 1) 
 
 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:   
 
Our client had an antique store in downtown Chicago that could not 
meet the sales targets. Therefore in order to attract customers, the 
owners of the store (a couple) have started to make home made 
sandwiches. After a while the sandwiches have become famous 
around the area, so they have increased their profits and they kept 
going. Currently, they want to expand by opening new stores, but 
they do not know whether it is a good strategy. They want you to 
develop their strategy to grow regarding the cost and the business 
drivers.  
 
Interviewer Hot Tip: Although it was a first round case, it was given by a 
partner. He barely gave data, therefore I made assumptions most of the time 
to proceed. He continuously asked for creative and reasonable ideas. 
Since the partner did not speak at all, I put down my structure and followed 
it. Therefore it was not a dialogue. During the case, it was hard to 
understand whether he liked my structure and ideas, but he gave very good 
feedback at the end. The key in such cases is to keep confidence, stick to 
your structure and proceed with reasonable assumptions. And a creative 
recommendation would be a great final. 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:   
 
• 
The store mostly serves sandwiches during the lunch time. 75% of the 
revenue is generated by lunch with the rest after 1pm. 
• 
The store is fully utilized during lunch and under utilized at other 
times.  
• 
Sandwiches are 50% of the revenues, desserts 10%, chips 10% and 
drinks 30%. 
• 
Variable costs: raw materials, labor and processing. Fixed costs: rent, 
SG&A, insurance and depreciation. 
 
IV. Sample Solution:   
 
I put some effort to understand the competition and the customersí value 
drivers that would give me a direction to focus about the direction and the 
mode of the growth that I could recommend for my client. Here are some of 
my findings and assumptions: 
• 
Competitors are the restaurants around serving mostly from 
11:30amñ 1:30pm. 


===== PDF p68 =====
Table of Contents 
 
64
• 
Rents are high in downtown Chicago and the new stores need to 
breaking even soon to enable further growth opportunities.  
• 
Most customers are working people who want a quick lunch and some 
non-working people and the students. 
• 
Currently there is no delivery service, this can be another option to 
generate additional revenue.  
• 
They need to keep the reputation of serving home made delicious 
sandwiches in an antique decorated atmosphere. 
After that, I focused on the direction and the mode of the growth applicable 
for my client. Starting with the option of opening new stores, I have listed 
the alternatives and evaluated each one briefly. 
Mode of growth: 
• 
With internal resources 
• 
Alliances 
• 
M&A 
Direction of growth: 
• 
Internal business 
• 
Vertical integrations 
• 
Diversification (related and unrelated businesses) 
• 
New geographic areas 
 
There is no right answer and a conclusion to be reached in this case. You 
need to be comprehensive enough while finding out the best growth strategy 
for the client regarding the prioritization because it is not possible to cover 
everything in detail in 25 minutes. I found out that our client can open new 
stores in limited numbers in Chicago because of the difficulty of finding 
available stores in downtown and the high rents. However our client might 
try to expand by not keeping the original format (not antique decorated big 
store) in Chicago. Also they can make the sandwiches for the groceries and 
other fast food stores. Delivery might increase their customer base and also 
they might keep the store utilized after rush hours. By keeping the format, 
they can open new stores in strategic locations of other big cities. One but 
profitable store in each big city might be good enough for our client (I could 
not make a break-even because did not have any data). Products might be 
expanded according to the location and the customer base. Why only 
sandwiches?      
