===== PDF p27 =====
CASE 11:  GAS STATION (LEK – Round 1)         
 
 
   MARKET SIZING 
 
Estimate the number of gas stations in the city of Chicago. 
1)  Think about all the ways you would go about estimating this and describe them 
2)  Choose one method and do the estimate 
3)  Second part of case he asked me to think about if a friend of mine wanted to open a gas 
station in Chicago, what things would I suggest my friend consider? 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
• None provided 
 
 
 
22
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
Estimate was mostly done by me with little input by my interviewer.  I used Philadelphia as a 
benchmark and tried to figure the number of gas stations per block and then estimated the number of 
blocks.  I know a lot of people estimated the number of gallons of gas a gas station would hold, the 
number of gallons of gas a car/truck can hold, the number of cars/trucks in and out of the city 
considering weekday commuting and delivering and weekend travel and then estimated how many gas 
stations would be required to meet the needs of the cars/trucks/etc. 
 
For the second part of the interview, I mentioned that my friend should take into consideration the 
volume of traffic in the area, the number of gas stations in the area (brand names vs. his no-name gas 
station), residential vs. commercial area – will he sell diesel fuel for trucks?, cross-selling by having a 
market as well, etc. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
There are a number of ways to go about this estimation and to a certain degree they may be governed 
by the amount and type of information that the interviewer is prepared to make available. 
 
A good recommendation for any estimation question however is to choose divisions that may be easily 
estimated or externally verified. 
 
The approaches suggested above are both valid. An alternative however would be as follows: 
• Estimate the number of people in Chicago and estimate the number of people per car 
• Gives the number of cars in Chicago 
• Estimate the total gallons of gas used per car per year 
• Gives the total number of gallons of gas used in Chicago. 
• If you can get an estimate of the average gallons sold by a service station in a year use this 
to get estimated number of service stations in Chicago 
 
(Alternatively if you can’t get the number of gallons sold per year you could estimate as follows: 
• What is the average number of customers per day 
• What is the average volume of one sale (average tank size) 
(Gives an estimate of the average sales per store.) 
 


===== PDF p28 =====
The second part of the case opens a general discussion of the attractiveness of an industry or a 
business. 
 
A good response should discuss the attractiveness of the industry: 
• What are the margins (low) 
• What is the intensity of competition (high – this is a commoditized product) 
• What is the power of supplier (high – they are massive multinational oil companies) 
• What is the power of buyers (high – people can easily drive to a different petrol station) 
• Substitutes – not many (walking or riding) – but this isn’t really a significant consideration 
 
Overall assessment should be that this is a difficult industry and therefore should only go into it is 
there is a good individual opportunity. In assessing the attractiveness of an individual opportunity you 
could look at: 
• Local competition – is there an area unserved? Is this a prime location? 
• Other sources of revenue – will the site enable large grocery/convenience store sales with 
higher margins? 
• What are the growth prospects? – Is the population increasing? Will traffic flow change?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
