===== PDF p60 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 55 
 
 
Tuck Consulting Club 
Got Gas? 
Case Description:  Our company is trying to determine how much it spent on gasoline last year and 
the impact of gas prices going forward. 
 
Inventory: [no exhibits] 
 
Industry: Manufacturing 
 
Potential applicable frameworks: 
 
 Profitability  
    3 C’s 
 
 Value Chain  
 Microecon. Analysis 
 Market Entry     
    4 P’s 
 
 Supply Chain  
 Internal / External 
 Competitive Threat     Porter’s 5 Forces 
 Market Sizing 
 Other 
 
 
Introduction 
 
We run a manufacturing business in Southeastern U.S. and have a number of salespeople who are 
consistently reimbursed for gas.  We would like to determine how much we spent on gasoline last 
year so that we can evaluate how the rising cost of gasoline will impact our bottom line.   
 
Question 1: What was the cost of gas last year? 
 
Question 2: How will our expenses be affected going forward? 
 
Question 3:  Do you have any recommendations on what we can do to curb our expenses? 


===== PDF p61 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 56 
 
 
Got Gas? (continued) 
 
Case Details 
 
Question 1: What was the cost of gas last year? 
 
Info to be given as case progresses: 
• 30 salespeople spread throughout country 
• 3 regions – East, Central, West (10 per region) 
 
Info to be given if asked: 
• How much does typical salesperson drive?  1000 miles per week (this is not an average 
for all salesmen) 
• There are three driver categories; low, medium and high mileage averaging 500, 1000 
and 1500 miles per week. 
• There are 5 low mileage, 15 medium and 10 high mileage drivers.  
• Does person get reimbursed for personal use?   Not supposed to but happens 
• Vehicles average 30 miles per gallon 
• Are there any other uses of gasoline (i.e. delivery trucks, factory machines, etc.)?  - there 
are but don’t worry about them 
 
Assumptions to be made by interviewee 
• Average gas price over given period 
 
Question 2: How will our expenses be affected going forward? 
 
Info to be given as case progresses: 
• Plans for sales force in coming year – no change in habits or mileage 
 
Assumptions to be made by interviewee 
• Average gas price going forward (best, worst, most likely case) 
 
 
Question 3: Recommendations for keeping expenses down? 
• Looking for out of the box recommendations here 
 


===== PDF p62 =====
© Tuck Consulting Club, 2006 
Page 57 
 
 
 
Got Gas? (continued) 
 
Recommended Solution 
 
Question 1 Details 
• Maybe break up prior year into 4 quarters to capture different level of gas prices 
throughout the year 
• (Assume everyone uses one octane level of gas, if asked) 
• Determine total number of miles for 30 sales force and the subsequent cost 
• Build in cushion for personal usage that slides thru cracks 
 
 
Question 2 Details 
• Come up with 3 scenarios on what may happen to gas prices going forward and how that 
would affect our expenses (worst, best, most likely) 
 
 
Question 3 Details 
• Come up with recommendations on ways to keep expenses down (setting limits on 
reimbursement, tighter controls, only reimburse for one level of gas, oil futures hedging 
strategy, issue gas cards for more visibility, etc.) 
 
 
Overall Recommendations 
 
A good answer includes: 
• A solid train of thought and come to a reasonable answer 
 
 
 
A better answer includes: 
• A table to clearly see the breakdown of the case logic 
• Make general assumptions to keep the case moving along 
• A common sense double check at the end to make sure the results are accurate 
 
A superior answer includes: 
• Strong out-of-the box recommendations including ways to implement these suggestions 
• Moving through the case without math errors in a timely manner 
