===== PDF p58 =====
Practice Cases – Case 7: Fighter Jet  
BCG 
 
 
54
(Source: Sample case from BCG website) 
 
Context 
Your client is a U.S. defense contractor that manufactures the Mohawk Light Fighter 
Jet for the British Royal Air Force. The company has produced the $20 million fighter 
jet for the past 12 years. The British government has decided to put the contract out 
to bid, however, and to win the program, the client's purchasing agents have 
estimated, the company will need to cut its costs by 5 percent. It has asked BCG to 
help it reduce costs. 
Establish understanding of the case 
Interviewee: Let me first clarify the question. The client manufactures a $20 million jet and, 
because of competitive forces, has to reduce its cost by 5 percent. Is BCG's role also to verify 
the purchasing department's estimate?  
 
Interviewer: No, you can assume that the purchasing estimate is correct. BCG's role 
is to find the cost savings to meet that estimate.  
 
Interviewee: Could I take a few minutes to think about the case?  
 
Interviewer: Sure, please do so.  
Set up the framework 
Interviewee: First, I would like to understand the cost structure of the jet to see what we 
should look at first. Next, I would like to look at major factors driving the costs we are 
targeting. Finally, I would like to explore potential ideas to reduce cost.  
 
Interviewer: That sounds like a very logical approach. Let's proceed.  
Evaluate the case using the framework 
Interviewee:  Because the time for the interview is limited, I think we should try to identify 
those areas most responsible for the cost of the jet.  
Interviewer: Time is limited on real projects as well, so I think that would be a good 
idea! You have the following cost information for the jet. How would you interpret it?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p59 =====
Practice Cases – Case 7: Fighter Jet  
BCG 
 
 
55
 
 
Interviewee: The major cost driver for the jet appears to be purchased materials. Within 
manufacturing, direct labor is a fairly large component of cost, as are program management 
and corporate overhead within overhead. I think we would want to concentrate most on 
materials, however, since that's where most of the costs can be found.  
Interviewer: That sounds like a good place to start. Where would you look within 
materials?  
Interviewee:  I see that materials are broken down into purchased subassemblies, 
components, and raw materials. I understand what raw materials would be, but what would be 
the difference between components and subassemblies?  
Interviewer: A subassembly functions on its own. An example is the pilot night 
vision system. A component is a smaller part, such as a part of the engine.  
Interviewee:  I know that governmental agencies often have very strict guidelines about 
purchasing that could affect the cost of materials.  
Interviewer: For the sake of this case, you can assume that the British Ministry of 
Defense, MOD, allows "commercial off-the-shelf" purchases, which means that the 
client is free to purchase from whomever it wants, as long as it can ensure that the 
parts meet MOD quality guidelines.  
Interviewee:  I see that purchased subassemblies comprise more than 70 percent of 
materials. How many suppliers are there for these subassemblies?  
Interviewer: There are seven suppliers of major subassemblies that go into the 
fighter jet.  
 


===== PDF p60 =====
Practice Cases – Case 7: Fighter Jet  
BCG 
 
 
56
Interviewee:  That seems like a relatively small number. Are there more suppliers that are 
qualified to do this type of work?  
Interviewer:  The manufacture of these parts requires a substantial investment in 
R&D, engineering, and infrastructure. It would be very costly for new suppliers to 
make the required investment, particularly if the client is trying to reduce the price it 
pays to the subassembly manufacturers.  
Interviewee:  Since there are only a few subassembly suppliers, and the investment hurdle 
would preclude bringing in competing manufacturers, it would be difficult to reduce the price 
paid. Perhaps we should look elsewhere for savings.  
Interviewer:  But remember, if your client loses the contract, it will lose its customer 
unless it is teamed with the competing bidder. Even then, if the competitor is 
underbidding your client, there will be even less room for it to profit.  
Interviewee:  Perhaps it would have an incentive to reduce its costs in order to maintain the 
contract. Are the majority of its costs in materials as well?  
Interviewer:  How could you find that out?  
Interviewee:  I would want to interview the purchasing and engineering personnel of the 
different subcontractors in order to understand their cost structures. If we had a better 
understanding of their economics, our client might be able to reduce cost across the board, 
allowing it to compete more effectively for the contract without killing everyone's margins.  
Interviewer:  Let's say that purchased materials average approximately 70 percent 
of the price paid to most of the manufacturers.  
Interviewee:  If the cost of subassemblies represents 40 percent of the jet cost and 70 
percent of that is purchased materials, total purchased materials would be approximately 28 
percent of the jet cost subassemblies. Purchases of raw materials and components represent 
another 15 percent, for a total of around 43 percent of the cost of the jet. If our client could 
reduce the cost of raw materials by 20 percent, it could reduce the cost of the jet by more 
than 8 percent, more than enough to offset the 5 percent reduction it would need to win the 
contract.  
Interviewer:  That sounds reasonable, but 20 percent is a very lofty goal. How would 
you go about doing that?  
Interviewee:  First, I would look at the number of suppliers. Are there a large number of 
suppliers to the subassembly manufacturers?  
Interviewer:  The client estimates that there are approximately 125 suppliers of raw 
materials and components among the manufacturers of the subassemblies and itself.  
Interviewee:  Well, that sounds like a large number of suppliers. Of course, they could be 
providing very specialized materials to the subassembly manufacturers. Are these suppliers 
providing customized or more commodity products?  
Interviewer:  About 80 percent of these products are commodities, such as sheet 
metal and wire harnesses. Even some of the electronics, such as printed wire boards 
and circuitry, are fairly generic.  
 


===== PDF p61 =====
Practice Cases – Case 7: Fighter Jet  
BCG 
 
 
57
Interviewee:  That sounds promising, but I would need to know whether these commodities 
are interchangeable, so that our client could concentrate spending with fewer suppliers. Are 
there many commonalities among the parts used by the different subassembly manufacturers? 
We could talk to their engineers and look at the designs and bills of material to determine how 
much overlap there is.  
Interviewer:  Let's say that you did this and discovered that approximately 30 
percent of the cost of raw materials is from similar materials used across the 
subassembly manufacturers.  
Interviewee:  It seems safe to assume that the client would need more commonality to be 
successful in concentrating its purchasing and reducing costs. Do the engineers believe that 
the percentage of overlap could be increased if the designs were modified?  
Interviewer:  They believe they could increase that percentage substantially, 
particularly with basic materials such as screws and sheet metal, but also in other 
more customized areas.  
Interviewee:  That's great news, but we would still need to know whether the subcontractors 
are using the same suppliers. We could analyze the number of suppliers for each of the areas 
of overlap.  
Interviewer:  Good suggestion. Although there are some common suppliers, the 
analysis indicates that the subassembly manufacturers tend to use different 
suppliers.  
Summarize and make recommendations 
Interviewee:  Our client needs to reduce costs by 5 percent. The largest area of opportunity 
appears to be in purchased materials, the majority of which comprise subassemblies 
manufactured by seven subcontractors. By looking at its purchases in total, the client can 
target approximately 40 percent of costs. To achieve the 5 percent cost reduction, it would 
need to reduce costs by 15 to 20 percent. It could try to do that by increasing commonality in 
the design of the subassemblies and components and by shifting volume to a smaller number 
of suppliers.  
Interviewer:  Considering that the majority of the raw materials and components are 
purchased commodities, do you think the 15-20 percent cost reduction is achievable? 
Interviewee:  Well, I know that raw materials and components typically have lower margins 
than more customized products. I suspect it may be challenging to hit the client's savings 
target by focusing only on these purchases. But since raw materials and components 
represent about 40 percent of costs and there is an opportunity to concentrate purchasing, I 
think we should start here.  
Interviewer:  Where else could you look for savings? 
Interviewee:  If I look back at the cost data on the jet, direct labor is another large cost 
component. As a contingency, we could look into that area as well. I've read that other 
companies use outsourcing to lower their manufacturing costs—perhaps our client could do the 
same.  
For example, it might want to increase its use of purchased subassemblies and reduce the 
amount of direct manufacturing it does. Of course this would work only if it could drive direct 
labor costs below the offsetting cost of these subassemblies. The client will be working closely  


===== PDF p62 =====
Practice Cases – Case 7: Fighter Jet  
BCG 
 
 
58
with the subassembly suppliers to implement its purchasing initiative. This may give it an 
opportunity to explore the suppliers' capabilities at the same time. 
Interviewer:  That's an interesting suggestion. How would you recommend the 
company pursue both of the initiatives you have discussed? 
Interviewee:  I would look first to combine purchases across the subassembly suppliers with 
our client's purchases. I suspect that the client and the subassembly suppliers will need to 
share a great deal of information, including engineering drawings and specifications, with 
potential suppliers of the raw materials and components. 
 
The Internet could prove to be a very effective medium for forming a single "virtual" 
purchasing department to consolidate both the flow of information and purchase orders across 
the companies. Our client might also want to use a bidding system for those materials that are 
true commodities. 
 
Next, I would turn to the engineering departments and form cross-company teams to look for 
areas to increase commonality of design. At the same time, those teams could explore 
opportunities to use more purchased subassemblies and decrease the client's direct labor 
costs.  
Interviewer: That sounds great, and is very similar to a project we did. I would 
caution you, however, to examine the upfront costs involved in your 
recommendations, both for the redesign and for the implementation of the 
purchasing system, before going ahead. 
