===== PDF p6 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
PROFIT IMPROVEMENT  
 
Profit Improvement Cases 
OFFICE SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
Question: 
 
An office supply company has asked you to determine why they are not as profitable as their primary competitor 
(i.e. OfficeMax vs. Office Depot).   
 
Approach: 
 
Think of an Income Statement.  Begin with Revenues and work your way down item by item (revenues, volume, 
price, costs, fixed, variable, etc.).  Identify any area that is not consistent with industry standards (as a % of sales).  
Once you have identified a problem area, then you can begin to determine the specific cause and then make 
recommendations for corrective action.   
 
 
Solution: 
 
In this particular case you would have discovered costs to be high.  Further analysis would have identified variable 
costs and specifically the cost of the products they are purchasing from their supplies.  With even further analysis, 
you would identify that shipping from the supplier is included in the price of these products.  Furthermore, these 
shipping costs are extremely high, because the suppliers are billing you for the shipping and thus have no incentive 
for them to manage them.  
 
 
Sample Conversation: 
 
Interviewee – I would begin by analyzing the company’s Income Statement to identify an area to further 
investigate.  Therefore, are the company’s revenues in line with the industry standards? 
 
Interviewer – Yes. 
 
Interviewee – How about their costs? 
 
Interviewer – They seem to be a bit high. 
 
Interviewee – Knowing that the company’s costs are high, I would then analyze in detail their cost structure by first 
determining if it is fixed or variable costs that need attention. 
 
Interviewer – In this case, their fixed costs seem to be fairly consistent; however, their variable costs seem to be 
high. 
 
Interviewee – I would then analyze their individual variable costs beginning with the cost of their primary variable 
cost, their products. 
 
Interviewer – It does seem that they are paying slightly more than their competitors for the products they purchase. 
 
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 32 
 
Interviewee – I would then analyze the components of that price. What does it include in addition to the actual price 


===== PDF p7 =====
EXAMPLE CASES BY TYPE 
PROFIT IMPROVEMENT  
 
of he product?  Taxes?  Freight?  And are these costs competitive? 
 
Interviewer – The price includes both taxes and freight. The taxes are obviously the same for all buyers, but the 
shipping costs do seem to be a bit high. 
 
Interviewee – I would then note this as a problem area to be addressed in my recommendations and then look for 
other problem areas. 
 
Interviewer – It turns out that this is the only area in which we appear not to be competitive. What would you 
recommend we do about it? 
 
Interviewee – I would recommend that we separate the freight charges from the price of the products and pay the 
freight ourselves (i.e. FOB). This would allow us to utilize the most competitive means of shipping the 
products.  Currently, the suppliers have no incentive to lower the shipping costs.   
 
The Consulting Club at The Darden School of Business  
 
 Page 33 
 
