===== PDF p80 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
76 
 
 
Case 20: Magazine Growth 
 
OVERVIEW 
Firm:       Marakon Associates 
Round:    2006 FT, First 
Content:  Qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a large media conglomerate, 4-Star Media.  4-Star functions mostly in online and 
print media, and within those in 3 major segments: 
 
4) Enthusiast Media – something like Hot Rod Magazine, Snowboarder Weekly, or S&M 
for the elderly. 
5) Consumer Guides – Motor Trend, Consumer Reports, etc. 
6) Business News 
 
We’re going to be focusing mostly on the business news segment today.  It’s called Prime Inc. 
and is broken down into print and online media itself.  There is a website but it basically just 
reproduces the news that’s in the magazine.  The business news segment has seen declining 
revenues over the past 5 years after decades of very stable growth.  We’ve been hired to consider 
two things.  First, we need to determine why revenues have been declining and second, we need 
to recommend some alternatives to stimulate growth. 
 
Additional information provided during questioning 
 
As the interviewer, you should recognize that most of the revenues from the magazine business 
come from advertising as opposed to subscriptions.  You also will know the results of some prior 
consumer research showing that there is low brand awareness from target customers who don’t 
already subscribe and former / current readers don’t feel the content is as insightful. 
 
SOLUTION 
 
High level, the student suggested a framework looking into internal factors such as a change in 
the price structures or a change in the product, external factors like competition or market 
dynamics, and customer factors like segmentation or preferences.  The student also brainstormed 
some ideas for growth, then followed the lead of the interviewer.  
 
Breakdown of solution (including quantitative analyses and qualitative evaluations) 
 
Interviewer: What would you look at in terms of addressing the first issue (revenue declines)? 
 
Interviewee: (Presents framework) 


===== PDF p81 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
77 
 
 
Interviewer: That makes sense.  So I can tell you right away that there was no change in pricing 
structure or the product itself, so that takes care of internal factors.  Let’s talk about the 
customers.  What would you want to know about them? 
 
Interviewee: I’d like to know who they are, what the target is, what they think of the product… 
 
Interviewer:  Which customers are you talking about? 
 
Interviewee:  I’m talking about the people who actually buy the magazine…  but those aren’t 
the only customers.  There are also ad sales in any media business like this one. 
 
Interviewer:  Right.  And off the top of your head, which would you say contributes more to total 
revenue, subscription revenue or ad revenue? 
 
Interviewee:  To be honest I’d have to say advertising revenue only because I know television 
relies on it so heavily. 
 
Interviewer:  In fact it is advertising revenue, and it’s about a 3/1 ratio.  So does that mean we 
should focus more heavily on advertisers than the subscribers? 
 
Interviewee:  I’d actually think the opposite.  I’d think that we’d want to focus on building a 
loyal, desirable subscription base that advertisers want.  My general feeling is that if we have the 
demographics that the advertisers want to hit, they will not only come to us, but it fact may be 
willing to pay a premium in some cases.  I wouldn’t see focus on advertisers as being all that 
useful if we can’t deliver on promises we make them. 
 
Interviewer:  OK, so back to the customers.  We look at the numbers and find that subscription is 
waning.  How would you examine why this is happening? 
 
Interviewee:  I’d try to look at syndicated reports first to get a sense of where people were 
turning for business news, but I think I’d want to go out and speak to the target customers, both 
subscribers and non-subscribers. 
 
Interviewer:  So you are able to conduct a market research study and you find that those who 
never subscribed have very low brand awareness, and those who have lapsed and even some 
who still subscribe feel that the magazine is not as insightful as it once was.  You also find that 
the average reader is now 10 years older than they were 5 years ago.  What are your thoughts? 
 
Interviewee:  Touching on the different things you told me, I’m less concerned about the low 
brand awareness because if we have a differentiated, quality product we can advertise it and 
position it better in the future.  I’m more concerned that people feel the magazine is not as 
insightful.  You said the product hasn’t really changed, so does this have to do with competition? 
 
Interviewer:  What do you think? 


===== PDF p82 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
78 
 
 
Interviewee:  I’d think so, maybe even to do with the availability of news on the internet.  So 
maybe simply reporting the news doesn’t get it done anymore.  And that could also explain some 
of the change in reader demographics – younger people realize they can just go to the internet for 
basic news, and they get that instantly. 
 
Interviewer:  So that was a key issue.  What might Prime Inc. do about it? 
 
Interviewee:  Maybe change the content a bit, do more human interest stories that skew 
younger.  I guess it depends on what advertisers they want and how far they can go without 
angering their existing readers.  Maybe do stories about how execs were using technology to 
solve problems in their organizations. 
 
Interviewer:  So who is the demographic here? 
 
Interviewee:  For a business newspaper, I’d say 35-65, mostly male but not entirely, and high 
income bracket. 
 
Interviewer:  Right, and who would want to market to those people 
 
Interviewee:  Business services, leisure, apparel, etc. 
 
Interviewer:  So let me give you 2 pieces of information.  Of the top 5 magazines doing business 
news, Prime Inc has the lowerst share of that demographic and the highest price per ad per 1000 
readers.  What does that tell you? 
 
Interviewee:  They’re overcharging – if they’re not hitting the target demographic (even if 
they’re hitting other ones) why would an advertiser pay the most money to advertise with them? 
 
Interviewer:  So what do you recommend? 
 
Interviewee:  Lowering ad prices to be competitive. 
 
Interviewer:  Do we want to lower them across the board?  What should we be aware of? 
 
Interviewee:  Well not all advertisers are the same.  Some do more volume and perhaps different 
industries have different price elasticities.  We should give our volume advertisers bigger 
discounts so we don’t lose them unless they are not sensitive to price – we can probably look 
historically as well as currently to see trends. 
 
Interviewer:  Great.  And how about alternative strategies to grow the business to those who 
haven’t heard of it? 
 
Interviewee:  I’d think you can use the website, try to leverage other media within the 
organization, develop proprietary content, launch a large ad campaign, etc… 


===== PDF p83 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
79 
 
 
Conclusions, summary, and additional thoughts 
 
This case is straightforward if you can talk about the relationship between the end reader and the 
advertiser.  If practicing with this case, try to get the interviewee to think outside the box as there 
was a lot of ‘idea generation’ through the course of the case.  An understanding of the publishing 
industry is helpful but not necessary, just ask a lot of questions if it’s new territory. 
