===== PDF p27 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 23 - 
Case 5: Real Estate Agency 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Bain & Company 
Round: 2008, Full-Time, First  
Content: Qualitative and Quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a real estate agency based out of Los Angeles. It focuses on managing and 
renting apartments for short-term contracts and temporary leases: our client rents the 
entire apartment building for 5 to 10 years, furnishes the apartments and rent each of 
them to its clients for a short period of time. Its clients are usually corporations (that rent 
apartments for expatriates or temporary transfers) and people from the entertainment 
industry. The company currently has $750M in revenues but only $12M in EBITDA. 
Bain was hired to help them increase the EBITDA to $34M. What are the possible 
recommendations? 
 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: This is an interesting case, and the interviewer said that she 
was at that time working with this client. Take the time to structure your thoughts and 
discuss the case.  
 
Besides the framework, the interviewer was expecting a different set of 
recommendations. Some important elements to be discussed were: 
- 
Opportunities for outsourcing 
- 
Economies of scale 
- 
Customer segmentation 
- 
Cost structure (variable vs. fixed) 
 
Key facts:  
o Fully-owned maintenance and cleaning services are charging 20% premium over 
market 
o Client does not own properties, they are all long-term leasing contracts 
o Decentralized procurement 
o There is no price discipline 


===== PDF p28 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 24 - 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: (Summarize the case and work on a profit framework). I want to understand 
all sources of revenue as well as costs, and figure out room for cost reduction or revenue 
optimization. I will analyze opportunities for expanding the business as well. I will start 
with Revenues. I am assuming the biggest revenue source is the rental revenues, right? 
What do we know about the customer demand? 
 
Interviewer: I can tell you that our client has 95% of occupancy rate. 
 
Interviewee: This is very impressive; I do not believe there is room to increase this rate 
because of the maintenance and turnover lead time. The client seems to have a very 
efficient sales force, thus volume cannot be increased. What about pricing? 
 
Interviewer: This is something I actually looked at. Regardless who the client is, there is 
no price differentiation at all. Also, at different times throughout the day, a client might 
be given different prices. 
 
Interviewee: Here we already see something to work on. The client should most likely 
implement a pricing schema which would allow price differentiation. Certainty some of 
the customers are less price sensitive. Also, our client does not seem to have a robust 
CRM or standardized processes. The client should perhaps implement systems and 
review processes which would improve its operation and offer pricing discipline. 
 
Interviewer: Right. Anything else to consider? 
 
Interviewee: Do we have market share data? I want to analyze the competitive landscape 
and see room for additional revenue streams. 
 
Interviewer: Yes we do. Our client’s 20 major competitors have all together the same 
market share of our client. 
 
Interviewee: Which means our client is the largest player in this industry. 
 
Interviewer: Yes it is, and for now it is not considering diversifying the business.  Thus 
let’s focus on costs. What are the major cost elements? 
 
Interviewee: The major fixed costs would be rent expenses and real estate taxes. 
Overhead and marketing expenses are also fixed. Operating staffing is primarily fixed, 
and so is furnishing. Other than that, there are only variable costs, such as: 
- 
Maintenance services 
- 
cleaning services 
- 
utilities 
- 
sales 


===== PDF p29 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 25 - 
 
 


===== PDF p30 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 26 - 
Interviewee: Let me start analyzing the rental costs, which is most likely the major cost 
element. What do you know about this cost category? 
 
Interviewer: Well, I was also very interested to know more about rental costs. This is 
what I found out. Rental contracts are managed locally by each of the client’s 45 
regional offices. They argue that the close relationship with landlords offers them more 
flexibility with contracts, eg. not paying rent during the summer months (low season). 
 
Interviewee: Although it could indeed be true, I would imagine economies of scale are 
huge in the real estate industry. There are very big real estate owners in this country. The 
client should think of centralizing rent negotiation for the major markets and perhaps 
keep some of the local markets with some autonomy. By doing so, our client could also 
consolidate and reduce overhead expenses. 
 
Interviewer: By doing so we estimated a $5-10M savings per annum. 
 
Interviewee: What do we know about the maintenance and cleaning costs? Is it 
outsourced or internal resources? 
 
Interviewer: This is also interesting. Our client has fully-owned maintenance company 
and cleaning services company. They are both high-end and offer great services. 
 
Interviewee: Do we know costs for equivalent services in the market? I would assume 
there is limited scale in the internal business and the company could save by contracting 
external services. 
 
Interviewer: We do. As I said, the current services are high-end, so our client could save 
20% of a $60M budget by outsourcing these services. 
 
Interviewee: Perhaps the client should spin off this business and then require lower 
costs. There is room for $12M savings. 
 
Interviewer: Anything else? 
 
Interviewee: Unless the client wants to expand into other businesses, we have already 
accomplished enough. We have already identified opportunities to generate the additional 
$24M in EBITDA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p31 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 27 - 
Interviewer: What are your recommendations? 
 
Interviewee: I would recommend a set of actions: 
- 
Spinning off the maintenance and cleaning service businesses will most likely 
generate an additional $12M in EBITDA; 
- 
Designing a pricing differentiation schema would allow our client to extract a 
higher margin from some of its customers; 
- 
Implementing CRM and new systems will generate cost savings; and 
- 
Centralizing procurement with major real estate owners will generate cost savings 
in renting expenses 
