===== PDF p103 =====
Business Type Cases (abbreviated answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
99 
Your client runs a national chain of mall-based stores that specialize in athletic shoes (sneakers, 
cleats, etc.) and also carries sporting apparel (hats, t-shirts, etc.).  There are two other mall-based 
athletic shoe retailers who are very similar to your client in terms of size, product mix and 
strategy.  Your client informs you that profits are declining and wants you to determine why and 
recommend a strategy to deal with it. 
 
Additional information provided (if interviewee asks probing questions): 
!"Sales are down at all three mall-based retailers, but sneaker industry sales are up overall 
!"Costs have increased, but all increases have been passed along to consumers to maintain 
margins. 
!"Non-traditional competitors have emerged who offer lower prices but no service. 
!"Customers fit into two segments, “users” and “fashionites.”  “Users” represent 40% of 
sales and seek out durable products and knowledgeable salespeople.  “Fashionites” 
comprise the remaining 60% and want to look good in the hottest new sneakers, but are 
more price conscious than the “users.” 
 
One Approach: 
 
Profits have decreased, so we use the profit equation, Profit = (Price-Costs) * Quantity.  A simple 
3 C’s analysis will also help bring out the key issues - What are the company’s core strengths?  
Who is the real competition and what are they doing differently?  What customer segments do 
we compete for and what are their unique needs? 
 
Costs have gone up, but so has price, so margins are relatively unchanged.  Profits have 
decreased, so quantity must have decreased also.  Sneaker sales are up overall, but have 
decreased in the malls so the other distribution channels must be stealing share.  The other 
distribution channels must be identified and analyzed in terms of their value propositions (price, 
selection and service).  It turns out that discount stores offer lower prices, but little variety and no 
service.  Mall stores offer good service but charge higher prices to cover their higher costs.  The 
“users” depend on variety and quality service and have remained loyal to the mall-based stores.  
Discounters do stock the hottest shoes at lower prices, so they must be stealing market share 
among the more price conscious “fashionites” who don’t care about service. 
 
Since the mall-based retailer depends on both segments to survive, it cannot cut back on service 
for the users.  It can, however, manage its inventory more effectively to offer discounts on the 
fastest moving “hot” shoes.  Since the “fashionites” are likely to be in the malls for other needs, 
they should be able to draw them back into the stores.  Losses due to the discounts on these shoes 
can be offset by increased volume, rapid turnover and complementary sales on t-shirts and 
accessories once these customers are in the store.  The prices do not need to match the 
discounters since the mall-based store benefits inherently from mall based traffic and can charge 
a slight premium for the convenience of location. 
