===== PDF p49 =====
Table of Contents 
 
45
 
Practice Case 21: AOL  
(Diamond Cluster - Round 1) 
 
I.  Case scope provided by interviewer:    
 
Its early 2003 and you are staffed at a leader ISP.  Itís been a dismal 
year with declining profits for this company and the CEO has recently 
announced that this will be reset year and that they are looking 
forward to 2004 being a rebound year with aggressive revenue 
growth.  The CEO has been getting mixed messages from 3 camps 
within the organization.  One camp thinks AOL should focus only on 
content and ditch the dial-up service offering.  Another thinks they 
should focus on connectivity alone and a third camp thinks that the 
best strategy to grow revenues in 2004 is to focus on both.  Weíve 
been asked by the CEO to recommend some actions.  We are the first 
team meeting, what issues do you think we should look at to assess 
the situation and come up with a recommendation. 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:   
 
The discussion was fairly high level and did not involve any numbers (at least 
none that were used in calculations).  The goal was to develop a high level 
approach and some ideas for revenue generation for the ISP. 
 
Information given: 
• 
Client offers connectivity through a dial-up service only, and provides 
content to its customers 
• 
Client has considerable proprietary content  
• 
New content takes 6-12 months to create. 
• 
The competition in the dial-up space has been fierce and has been 
driving prices down.   
• 
Our client currently charges on average $20/month for its service. 
• 
They currently have have 27 million customers,  
• 
17 million customers have left this year alone 
• 
Customers can be categorized by age and value drivers 
• 
< 20 yrs - driven by price, looking for cheap connectivity   
• 
20-45 yrs ñ has wider bandwidth needs 
• 
>45 yrs ñ convenience and simplicity 
• 
Two options are currently being considered 
o Partner with local DSL/Cable service provider to offer their 
service with a broadband version of the content  
o Our client chooses the right connection (DSL/Cable) for its 
customers and whatís located in their area.   
 
III. Cracking the case:   
 


===== PDF p50 =====
Table of Contents 
 
46
In order to make sure I understand our clientís revenue model, I would like 
to know what specific products and services provides? 
 
Ok, our client offers connectivity through a dial-up service only, and provides 
content to its customers. 
Do they develop all of their own content or do they partner with other 
content developers? 
 
They develop content as well as partner with others to provide content. 
 
Ok, now that I have a clearer understanding of what our client does, Iíd like 
to look at the reasons why profits have been declining?  First, Iíd like to start 
by understanding our current revenue streams.  Has there been significant 
price decline in the past year? 
 
Yes, the competition in the dial-up space has been fierce and has been 
driving prices down.  Our client currently charges on average $20/month for 
its service. 
 
So, it looks that at least part of the profit decline has come from decreased 
revenues due to pricing pressure.  Now, Iíd like to look at the customer base 
and understand the trends there.  Has our client been losing a significant 
number of customers? 
 
Yes, they currently have 27 million customers, but in 2003 so far, 17 million 
have left. 
 
Iíd like to learn more about the segmentation and value drivers of the clientís 
customers? Have the customers that they have lost come from a specific 
segment? 
 
Well, we can separate customers broadly by age groups:   
< 20 yrs - driven by price, looking for cheap connectivity   
20-45 yrs ñ has wider bandwidth needs 
>45 yrs ñ convenience and simplicity 
 
I would guess that our client is losing a lot of customers from the 20-45 age 
group due to the competition from broadband providers.  Has our client 
thought about developing a broadband product offering? 
 
Yes, we think that our client should focus on the broadband opportunity to 
see how it can prevent losing customers from this segment. 
 
What considerations do you think they need to make to assess this 
opportunity? 
 
Well, they would need to assess the costs of offering the new service vs. the 
potential revenue they would be able to generate by stopping current 


===== PDF p51 =====
Table of Contents 
 
47
customer churn as well as attracting new customers.  They could either 
develop their own broadband service or focus on content and allow 
customers to choose their own broadband service. 
 
What do you think are some of the costs that would be associated with 
developing a broadband product offering? 
 
I think that the following costs would need to be considered: 
Technology: building/leasing new infrastructure, partnerships 
Content Development:  content for broadband 
Advertising: to attract new customers and retain current customers 
Additional Overhead:  customer service staffing and training costs 
 
Ok, letís talk about how they would provide the broadband service.  They 
basically have 2 options. 1) Partner with local DSL/Cable service provider to 
offer their service with a broadband version of the content 2) Our client 
chooses the right connection (DSL/Cable) for its customers and whatís 
located in their area.  Which one do you think they should choose? 
 
They should probably choose the one that will allow them the most control 
over their costs.  I think that would be to have our client choose the 
connection for their customers. 
 
Ok, so, weíre in 2004 and we some quick revenue generation ideas.  Keep in 
mind that most content takes 6-12 months to develop internally. Do you 
have any ideas for other products and services that our client could generate 
revenues?   
 
Entertainment and Education products such as: On-line music, providing 
news and traditional TV programming via the web, childrenís educational 
games such as partnering with Leap Frog learning systems for buying 
downloading educational games etc, 
 
You are in a meeting with the CEO and he wants to know what weíve found 
so far, what do you say to the CEO? 
 
I think the best route to increasing revenues for 2004 would be to focus on 
the segment of your customers where the majority of churning is happening, 
that is the 20-45 age group whose value driver is greater bandwidth.  We 
should look at partnering up with some broadband service and content 
providers to develop a product offering for this segment.   
