===== PDF p29 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
25  
5.4. 
 Wealth Financial Advisory Services to Affluent Individuals 
Source: Deloitte Consulting, LLP 
Length: Long (30-45 minutes) 
 
Case Scenario 
The client is a provider of wealth advisory services to high-net-worth individuals.  
Typical wealth advisory services include:  investment strategy and portfolio management, 
estate and trust planning, tax planning and preparation, insurance planning, family office 
services (e.g., bill payment services) and the like.   The client started out as a professional 
services specialist to corporate clients, but over time, has successfully expanded into 
individual wealth advisory services. Over time, the revenues generated from the wealth 
advisory services component of the company grew to over $400M worldwide.   
Traditional players in this market are high-end private banks (e.g., JP Morgan), and 
boutique financial planners.  These players do not offer their own products, but typically 
have close partnerships or affiliations with those who do (e.g., mutual fund companies, 
insurance companies and brokerage houses).  
Within the last 12 months, several disruptive events have occurred in the marketplace.  
Large and diversified financial services players are launching aggressive national 
marketing campaigns around their wealth advisory services businesses, and the results are 
paying off as they begin to capture an alarming share of the market in a short period of 
time.  In addition, a new, completely different type of competitor has announced its 
presence and intent to enter the wealth advisory services market, offering a value 
proposition very similar to the client’s.  This new concern is well funded, and has some 
of the most successful venture capitalists of the day filling the seats on its board of 
directors.  This new competitor is also causing significant problems for the client; within 
the past 3 months, the top five producing partners have left to join this firm, taking their 
clients with them, and leaving the client’s geographic presence in a strategically critical 
growth area significantly weakened. In addition, the client is finding that its revenues are 
decreasing significantly in certain types wealth advisory services they offer.   
The client has retained the services of Deloitte Consulting to help them understand what 
their strategic response options are, and to recommend the best course of action to follow.   
 
Key Interview Questions 
Assume you have just joined the Deloitte Consulting team for this project and today is 
the project kick-off meeting.  What would be your hypothesis around the root cause of 
the client’s issues and what information would you want to look at to determine the best 
recommendation for the client?  What information do you need to arrive at your 
hypothesis?  What do you feel are the strategic options facing the client? 
 
Possible Recommendations/Approaches & Key Points/Issues Candidate Should 
Cover:  
Suggested framework:  3 C’s approach: company, customer (market) & competition 
Understand the Client’s capabilities and position in the marketplace:  (value chain 
analysis) 


===== PDF p30 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
26  
The company differentiates itself in the wealth advisory market by offering independent 
and objective advice to its clients, recommending only those products and services 
warranted by the investment strategy and the client’s particular risk profile.  The client 
does not form formal partnerships or alliances with product suppliers (e.g., investment 
banks and fund managers).   
The Client is known worldwide for its expertise in its legacy businesses: corporate tax 
preparation & advisory services, as well as audit services.  About 75% of its business is 
in tax preparation and services, the remaining is in wealth advisory services, but both its 
market share and the market itself is growing.  As tax preparers and auditors, 
independence and objectivity is not only critical, it is required and monitored by the SEC.  
The company offers its wealth advisory services using the same model as for tax 
preparation (e.g., fee per hour).   
While its position as independent and objective differentiates itself vis-à-vis the product 
players, it limits the areas it can control in the value chain:    
plan    
 
advise    
execute  
reassess and modify 
      (determine goals)  
 
(develop plan)  
 (based on performance,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   and chgs to risk profile)  
 
 
 
 
Due to SEC restrictions, the client is not allowed to execute transactions (e.g., the 
purchase of securities, taking custody of funds, etc.); it must advise and recommend only.  
Other players, many of them competitors, such as banks, mutual fund companies, 
insurance companies, are the ones who are ultimately able to execute.  As a result, the 
client cannot control who develops relationships with their customers.  The key part of 
the value chain to control is link between “advise” and “execute” in that controlling the 
relationship with the customer is controlling the execution and the quality of the 
execution, and blocking or limiting the role of these other players who execute services.   
While the client offers and sells a vast portfolio of services to its customers, the amount 
of revenues generated from services other than tax preparation and advice has been 
declining.  (the customer is retreating to purchasing services that the client is branded and 
well-known for, seeking investment advisory services from better known names (e.g., 
investment banks) who have entered the market and have aggressive marketing 
campaigns).   
Understand Competitive shifts: Which competitors are entering the market?   
During the past few years, the number of players entering the wealth advisory services 
space has grown considerably.  Investment banks, mutual fund companies and brokerage 
firms have all entered this realm, and many are targeting the affluent segment. 
The New Economy is disrupting this market. In addition to investment banks and private 
banks entering the market, pure online players such as e*Trade are aligning with 
traditional high-end banks (e.g., Northern Trust) to offer their affluent clients online 
trading and account monitoring capability.  Finally, a new entrant, myCFO.com is a pure 
internet play that competes directly with the client in the independent and objective 
advice category, but does so without being burdened with the restrictions of being a 
public accounting and audit firm (e.g., they are able to strike alliances, partnerships, and 
can offer its customers access to invest in venture capital funds). 


===== PDF p31 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
27  
Why are they entering the market?   
Investment banks, mutual fund companies and other diversified financial institutions 
(Schwab, AmEx) have heavily invested in IT to support the Internet brokerage and 
trading business.  They are now leveraging their IT capabilities by expanding into wealth 
advisory services, bolstered by offering online customer accounts, where customers can 
access their accounts and advisors 24/7.  Many are entering into this area because 
margins for these services are higher than commissions on trades (brokerage fees), which 
are shrinking due to downward pressure brought about by discount online trading options 
such as e*Trade.  Launch of these premium online customer accounts is being bolstered 
by aggressive national advertising campaigns.      
Understand Market (and Customer) shifts:   
The tremendous wealth creation occurring in the mid to late 90s has created a growing 
number of affluent individuals in the United States (“Affluent” = net worth exceeding 
$1M).  While the market for wealth advisory services to affluent individuals is growing, 
the market for independent and objective advice is unclear, because the value placed on 
independence and objectivity in this space is unclear.  Competitors who are clearly not 
objective (e.g., investment banks and mutual fund companies), are positioning its wealth 
advisory services as independent and objective.  The major question is whether or not the 
customer appears to appreciate the difference between a true provider of objective advice, 
and those positioning themselves as “pseudo-objective”.  Is this critical, single 
differentiating factor that separates our client from its larger, better funded and more IT 
enabled competitors – valued enough to sustain the business? 
Evaluate the Strategic Options available to the client:   
Option 1:  Exit the wealth advisory services portion of the business (about 25% of overall 
revenues, the remainder comes from tax and audit services);  Option 2:  stay with the 
current strategy of offering objective and independent advice but invest to develop an IT 
platform to offer an online offering to its clients; Option 3:  assess the market for 
“independent and objective advice” (e.g., evaluate whether this attribute is strategically 
sound as the core differentiating attribute).   
Case Wrap-Up 
STRATEGIC OPTIONS:  The Deloitte Consulting Team recommended several options:   
• Exit the business;  
• Stay in the business and invest incrementally to remain competitive (e.g., expand 
existing practices, bring in more experienced hires);  
• Stay in the business and aggressively invest to develop an IT-based customer channel  
• Spin off the business from the core business of tax and audit and pursue more 
aggressive alliance and JV strategies.  
 
Choosing the option involves addressing the central key issue:  what is the market for 
independent and objective advice?  We recommended the client address this issue before 
making a decision on the option to pursue:  
Deloitte Consulting recommended that the client initiate a conjoint analysis study to 
determine the relative value placed on this attribute vs. cost and other attributes. 


===== PDF p32 =====
 
Haas Consulting Club Case Book 
 
28  
In addition, Deloitte Consulting examined how, as a public accounting firm, is it possible 
to exert more control over the execution portion of the value chain. 
Deloitte Consulting recommended that the client initiate a developmental program in 
house to mentor and develop client service professionals to become “Most Trusted 
Advisors” – deepening the relationship with current clients to sell the full scope of wealth 
advisory services (not just tax services). In doing so, the client became a more customer-
centric organization, focusing on serving the specific and evolving needs of its customer 
base.  
