===== PDF p200 =====
Case #18: ValueCenter Human 
Capital
Industry: Retail
Quantitative Level: Low
Qualitative Level: High
Quantitative level: Not applicable
Qualitative level: Medium
195


===== PDF p201 =====
ValueCenter Human Capital
197
• Your client, ValueCenter, is the nation’s largest, global retailer. The company is 
implementing a new supplier management system in order to increase the 
transparency into the purchasing decisions and ultimately decrease costs. This new 
system will replace thousands of homegrown systems currently used within the 
company. Currently, orders placed from suppliers are manually keyed into 
ValueCenter’s ERP system at local offices by employees. With the new system, the 
goal is to have a centralized platform where ValueCenter employees can input new 
supplier information and place orders. Additionally, the new system will allow 
suppliers to log into the system to update information like address and billing 
changes, something ValueCenter employees had to do in the past. Because of the 
size and international scope of ValueCenter, the implementation of the system will be 
rolled out in phases.
• The leadership at ValueCenter is worried at how this change will affect its employees 
and productivity so has hired you to advise the company through this change. How 
would you assist the client as it does through this large scale change?
Prompt:


===== PDF p202 =====
Interviewer Guidance
198
•
Guiding Questions:
– Who are the stakeholders involved?
– What are the anticipated challenges you foresee?
– What phases would you propose to roll out the implementation?
• Additional Information:
– The last large scale tech implementation resulted in a huge loss in productivity because of a 
lack of training. Because of this, training is a priority for leadership.
– Leadership wants to roll out the implementation in mid-size markets first. Proposed markets 
are Mexico, Hong Kong, Brazil and Canada.
– Management needs the training schedule to be flexible and time sensitive. Hours spent in 
training are hours spent away from productive work.
– The culture of ValueCenter is high efficiency at the lowest possible cost. 
Interviewer Guidance:


===== PDF p203 =====
Answer
199
•
Structure: Assess, Design, Deliver (with accompanying workstreams)
•
Assess
–
Stakeholder Analysis: Conduct a stakeholder analysis to identify key stakeholders (those employees who will be impacted by the 
change and to what extent) at each of the locations that the new system will be rolled out.
–
Change Impact Assessment: Conduct a change impact analysis (i.e a forum for those impacted stakeholders) to identify concerns 
about the new system and document all procedural changes that will need to be addressed via training and communications)
•
Design:
–
Training: Design training materials to prepare employees for the new system. These training materials should vary in the type of 
delivery to ensure they are adaptable to all learning styles. For example, there should be instructor led trainings, computer based 
trainings and quick reference guides for FAQs. 
–
Communications: Design a communications plan documenting all communications that will be delivered to stakeholders. This plan 
should outline what group of stakeholders should receive what message, the frequency of the communications, the vehicle of 
communication and the due date. 
–
Change Management: For such a large-scale change, it would be advantageous to create a Change Agent Network made up of 
“change agents” who will champion the new technology and be subject matter experts on the new system amongst colleagues. The 
Change Agent Network would meet several times before the Go-Live date to receive additional training on the system and get the 
opportunity to answer any questions or address any concerns arising from colleagues. 
•
Deliver:
–
Training: Roll out training in a time sensitive way, ensuring that employees can receive the training that they need without 
sacrificing too much time away from their day-to-day work. Offer the training as close to the Go-Live date as possible. 
–
Communications: Execute on the first communications that are meant to build awareness. As the Go-Live date approached, the 
emails will be more tactical with system updates and how to prepare for G-Live.
–
Change Management: Facilitate Change Network Meetings to inform the change agents of upcoming events. Inform all employees 
that the change agents will be the go-to people for questions regarding the change and new system so that management can carry 
on with day-to-day activities. 
Human Capital Strategy:


===== PDF p204 =====
Evaluation Criteria
Candidate Level
Assessment
Average Candidate
The candidate does not use a framework but does 
identify some workstreams like training, 
communications and change management. 
Good Candidate
The candidate uses a framework like Assess, Design, 
Deliver and identifies some of the workstreams like 
training, communications and change management. 
The candidate provides some detail on how to execute 
each workstream.
Excellent Candidate
The candidate uses a framework like Assess, Design, 
Deliver and identifies the training, communications and 
change management workstreams. Additionally, the 
candidate details how to execute each workstream in 
the given phase and references a timeline for 
completion. The candidate tailors their answers to the 
prompt, highlights training as a main priority and 
identifies challenges they foresee.
200
