===== PDF p135 =====
- 130 - 
Retailer Business Restructuring 
Business Situation  
Our client, Unlimited Brands, is a large national 
retailer with revenues of $12B.  Recently they 
have experienced declines in revenue and profits.  
They attribute these declines to both changes in 
consumer tastes as well as decreased investment 
in several brands due to the desire to preserve 
capital during the recent downturn. There are two 
units they are interested in potentially divesting: 
Fast Fashion: a young women’s 
professional clothing retailer with sales of 
$500M last year (cater to 18-25 yr old 
women). 
Devine Design: a fashion forward clothing 
retailer offering both professional and 
casual clothing at competitive prices, with 
sales of $750M last year (cater to 40-55 yr 
old women). 
 
You have been hired to determine the most viable 
business unit to divest and plan for the separation 
of the unit from the firm, while maximizing 
shareholder value. 
Problem Statement 
For interviewer to provide upon problem 
statement clarification. No other data will be 
provided outside of the tables given. 
Assumptions are ok and encouraged. 
 
What things will the firm need to consider 
when selling one or more of their business 
units? (note to interviewer: this should be a 
brainstorming session and focused on retail 
business, force the interviewee to continue 
to provide ideas until they say they have 
explored all they think they can) 
Which business unit of the two initially 
decided upon should Unlimited Brands 
consider selling to strengthen its cash 
reserves and deliver the most value to 
shareholders? What price should they 
target for each unit? 
To sell additional work to the client what 
ideas would you recommend to Unlimited 
Brands to strengthen their business? 
Difficulty: Hard  
Quant Heavy   
Industry: Retail  
Type: Restructuring 


===== PDF p136 =====
- 131 - 
Retail Business Restructuring 
Prompt Questions and Responses (For interviewer reference ONLY)  
1.
What things will the firm need to consider when selling one or more of their business units? (continue to probe until the 
interviewee declines for exploration) 
•
Culture/People Impact: Selling off assets can disrupt your employees and impact the image of the company.  Retaining 
key talent is also very important to maintaining the strength of the company.  Employees may worry about what will be 
sold next, and be less effective until they know better. 
•
Impact to Revenue: Although these units have been viewed  as underperformers, it will be important for the firm to make 
sure they explain the impact to earnings to shareholders and think how decreased earnings could affect their borrowing 
options in the future. 
•
Potential Buyers: Need to understand who the potential buyers will be and what selling to them will do to the clients’ 
competitive position.  Will this change give a competitor strength over the client? 
•
Separation: Considering the separation issues that will occur is important.  IT, stores, shared space in malls, distribution 
of products and suppliers are all important for performing a smooth transition to a buyer. 
 
2.
Which business unit of the two initially decided upon should Unlimited Brands consider selling to strengthen its cash reserves 
and deliver the most value to shareholders?  What price should they target for each unit? 
[Note to interviewer: Provide data sheet to the candidate] 
Based on the data provided 
Candidate should walk through the tables and determine: 
•
Revenue and profits have been decreasing at Fast Fashion while increasing at Devine Design. 
•
A good answer is when the candidate simply takes the average PE from each deal table they will determine that the implied 
potential price for Fast Fashion is $1.2B (16 PE x $75M NI), and $2.1B (14 PE x $150M).  
•
A better answer will see that the PE’s used to value similar firms to Fast Fashion most recently have been higher, at 20 and 
would yield $1.5B. Similarly, the PE has been declining for Devine Design to 10, and would result in $1.35B. 
•
The other table will show that the Fast Fashion customer segment is growing fast, while Devine Design’s is actually declining, 
but the revenue is actually projected to grow faster for Devine Design than Fast Fashion.  The number of competitors does not 
drive much  of the analysis.  (these facts should supplement their choice) 
The candidate should decide which business unit they would select and defend their choice: 
•
Fast Fashion: Higher price based on most recent multiples, fast growing segment with increase spend could yield upside to a 
buyer and thus result in a higher price. 
•
Devine Design: Lower price based on recent PE’s but if using average higher price.  Revenue and profits have been 
increasing and revenue is projected to grow faster even with a slight reduction in spend. 


===== PDF p137 =====
- 132 - 
Unlimited Brands Business Restructuring – Data Sheet 
Fast Fashion 
 
Devine Design 
 
Fast Fashion Comparable 
Deals 
Devine Designs 
Comparable Deals 
Industry Overview 
Deal Date PE Multiple Deal Size ($B)
Fast A Oct 2009
12
0.6
Fast B
Apr 2010
16
0.7
Fast C Dec 2011
20
1.4
Fast D Nov 2010
16
1.9
Fast E Mar 2011
20
2.5
Fast F Jun 2009
12
3.1
Deal Date PE Multiple Deal Size ($B)
Fast A Dec 2011
10
0.4
Fast B Oct 2009
18
0.6
Fast C Mar 2011
10
1.1
Fast D
Apr 2010
14
2.2
Fast E Jun 2009
18
3.0
Fast F Nov 2010
14
4.0
2009
2010
2011
Revenue ($M)
625
550
500
Net Income ($M)
125
96
75
2009
2010
2011
Revenue ($M)
600
625
675
Net Income ($M)
90
109
135
Retail Business Restructuring 


===== PDF p138 =====
- 133 - 
Prompt Questions and Responses (For interviewer reference ONLY)  
 3. To sell additional work to the client what ideas would you recommend to Unlimited Brands to strengthen 
their business?  
Several examples below: 
• Improved Pricing 
• Could examine their current pricing structure and ensure price realization is maximized 
• Promotion strategy; when to promote, who to target, what to promote, etc 
• New Market Opportunities 
• They may be able to target new customer segments or sell new classes of products to existing 
customers 
• Acquisitions 
• Could use the proceeds from the sales of an underperforming unit to buy a smaller player in a 
different space to enhance the companies’ portfolio of brands 
 
Retail Business Restructuring 


===== PDF p139 =====
- 134 - 
Conclusion 
Client should sell Fast Fashion for $XB or Devine Design for $XB (Note to interviewer: rationale should come from their 
defense earlier, either answer is reasonable, key is to make them choose and stick to it) 
Assist the client by: 
– Creating a clear plan and strategy to effectively separate the businesses 
– Maximize value to shareholders by attaining the best price 
Risks:  
– Selling to a competitor and providing them opportunity to succeed at our expense 
– Not calculating the right value  
– Losing talent to attrition and fear of being sold 
Next Steps: 
– Identify potential buyers 
– Establish Day 1 and Day 2 plans for separation after client sale 
– Work with client to sell additional work highlighted earlier 
 
Retail Business Restructuring 
