===== PDF p109 =====
Estimation Cases 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
105 
 
 
Estimation Cases 
 
Suppose you are flying on a plane with the CEO from Exxon and you want to sell a consulting 
engagement.  He has just left to use the lavatory and you have about five minutes to estimate his 
yearly revenues from personal automobile gasoline sales in the U.S. (excluding commercial 
trucks, boats, etc.) How would you go about coming up with this estimate?  
 
1. Assume the population of the U.S. is 250 million. 
2. Estimated number of people per household is 2.5, making 100 million households. 
3. Estimated number of cars per household is 1, which gives 100 million cars in the U.S. 
4. Assume each car gets filled up once per week (or 50 times per year to use simple numbers) 
5. Assume the average fill-up is 10 gallons.  50 X 10 is 500 gallons per car. 
6. Total gallons sold is 500 X 100 million = 50 billion. 
7. If average price is $1.25, total revenue from U.S. automobiles is $62.5 billion. 
8. Estimated market share of Exxon is 20% [the interviewer asked me why and I explained that 
I believed the market was basically an oligopoly with a few players dominating the market.  
This type of market typically has market share of the dominating competitors of around 
20%]. 
9. Calculated total revenues for Exxon from the U.S. household automobile market, therefore, 
is $12.5 billion. 
 
 
How many beer bottles are currently in circulation in the US? 
 
First I decided to figure out the annual beer consumption to get at annual consumption of bottles.  
I estimated the population of U.S. as 250M, took out children who don’t consume beer 
(approximately 10%, which gave me the number of 225M).  Then I divided it into men and 
women as they have different consumption patterns – men probably consume more.  I estimated 
the number of men and women to be approximately equal at 125M and 125M.  Then I estimated 
that men probably drink 2 bottles a week on average, making it approximately 100 bottles a year 
per person (heavy beer drinkers and men not drinking beer will average out), giving a total of 
12.5B.  Women probably drink 2 bottles a month making it a total of 3B yearly.  The total yearly 
consumption is 15.5B.  
 
This is where the trick was because my interviewer was not satisfied with a yearly number, he 
wanted to have a current circulation number.  I used the concept of velocity to come up with the 
number: yearly consumption = current circulation * some velocity (# times the bottle goes 
through the economy).  I estimated the velocity to be around 70 assuming an average 5-day 
purchasing cycle.  Thus the current circulation of beer bottles equals approximately 220M 
bottles.  


===== PDF p110 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
106 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
 
I have an odd hobby (odd because this interviewer was male) of knitting.  I knit about 10 
sweaters per year.  I am looking into this as a business opportunity and want you to estimate the 
size of the hand knitting yarn market. 
 
First I would look at all the places that sell hand-knitted sweaters and … 
 
!"Actually, most of the hand knit sweaters sold in stores are produced abroad and the yarn 
they use is produced abroad.  I am more concerned with the high quality hand knitting yarn 
sold in the U.S. for “hobby” type knitting. 
 
OK, then I would try to estimate how many people knit or I could look at how many stores sell 
knitting yarn. 
 
!"Good, there are 3,000 specialty stores that sell knitting yarn.  Also some bigger stores, like 
Wal-Mart, sell a small selection of lower quality yarn. 
 
OK, then I would take a sample of these stores and estimate their sales of yarn and then 
extrapolate that over the remaining stores.  I would try to sample stores that are of typical size 
and revenues. 
 
!"OK, I have data on 3 stores.  The first is in Rhode Island and has $100,000 in annual 
revenues.  The second store is in Austin Texas in the owner’s garage.  Its revenues are 
$40,000.  The third store is in Massachusetts and has revenues of $170,000.   
 
I don’t know if these three are typical and is not a large enough sample to base the system on.  
Hmmmmm . . . . . . . . . .  I guess if each store stays in business it must be making money.  Maybe 
I can look at what it would take for each store to stay in business. 
 
!"Good, what expenses would a store like this have? 
 
Rent, Labor, Advertising, and the cost of the products. 
 
!"The mark-up on knitting supplies is about 100%, although with sale items it averages around 
60%.  Of the expenses, the variable costs make up about 50% of expenses.  What would be 
your estimates for an average size store’s expenses? 
 
Since these knitting shops are probably not in malls, and one was even in a garage, I would say 
the rent is fairly low, say $500 per month.  There are probably just a few workers that aren’t too 
well paid.  Maybe they are making $30,000 a year. 
 
!"Do you know what minimum wage is? 
 
OK, so maybe they make $15,000 a year.  Advertising would consist of just local ads in papers 
and maybe a knitting magazine.  I would guess that to be about $2,000 a year.  The sum of these 


===== PDF p111 =====
Estimation Cases 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
107 
costs is $38,000 per year.  If this is 50% of expenses, then the total costs would be $76,000.  So 
with their 60% markup it would be…. 
 
!"For simplicity just base your initial estimates on break-even. 
 
OK, then 3,000 stores that sell $76,000 annually, it comes to $228 million.  Wow that is bigger 
than I thought it would be. 
 
!"Actually the knitting yarn market is about $350 million.  Do you know why your numbers are 
understated? 
 
Well, actually I would say that my number is somewhat overstated because there are other 
supplies, such as knitting needles, patterns, etc that would be part of the sales.  But I also realize 
it is understated because we assumed break-even and I am sure most of these stores turn a profit 
or they would not stay in business.  Also, we only counted the sales at the specialty stores.  I 
ignored the sales at the Wal-Mart type stores. 
 
!"Good. 
 
 
How many people fly in and out of LaGuardia every day? 
 
My first attempt at this was to begin with the number of airlines that fly into/ out of LGA.  I then 
proceeded to try to figure out how many cities these airlines fly to from LGA.  This was nearly 
impossible to determine realistically.  I asked to try again and the interviewer said “good idea.” 
 
I looked at the problem again and realized it was a capacity problem.  No two planes could be on 
a runway at a given time and most likely had to be spaced by a few minutes for safety reasons.  
With this assumption, I continued to break the day into peak (7am-10am, 3pm-8pm), midpeak 
(10am-3pm) and off peak times (8pm-11pm).  I assumed no flights in the middle of the night.  I 
further assumed planes are spaced 5 minutes apart at peak hours, 10 minutes at midpeak and 15 
minutes apart during off peak times. 
 
Capacity assumptions assumed 100% at peak, 75% at mid peak, and 50% at off peak.  With an 
average plane holding 200 people, it would be (200 people/plane x 12 planes/hr x 8hrs) + (150 x 
6 x 5) + (100 x 4 x 3) = 24,900 people. 
 
With 2 runways, LaGuardia has roughly 50,000 people flying in and out every day. 
 
The feedback I got was good (moved onto the next round of interviews).  The interviewer told 
me he was looking for me to break the problem into peak and off peak times.  To be even better 
you could give an answer for weekdays and weekends (peak times shift). 
 
 
 
 
 
