===== PDF p101 =====
Consulting Case Interview Question 
 
Case No.: STRAT19             
Firm:     
Type of Case:  
X 
Strategy  
 
New Product Introduction  
 
 
Competitive Response 
 
New Market 
 
 
Response to Changing 
Environ. 
X 
Merger or Acquisition 
 
 
Other 
 
Other   
 
 
Initial Facts offered by interviewer:   
 
A British company has hired our consulting firm to evaluate its recent diversification into a new 
market.  The firm has been a producer of car batteries in the domestic market for thirty years and is 
currently the quality leader throughout the United Kingdom.  A few years ago, the product line was 
expanded to provide batteries for forklifts and other motorized loading trucks.  The initial entry into 
this market was successful, but since then, sales have decreased steadily every year. 
 
Our consulting firm has been able to dig up the following background information: 
• The client entered the forklift battery business to utilize the company’s excess capacity during 
periods of inactivity.  
• This industry is very mature and annual growth rates have been very small over the past few 
years. 
• Competitors in the industry include: 
− 4 domestic producers (experiencing decreasing market share) 
− 1 French producer (experiencing stagnant share) 
− 1 Spanish producer (experiencing increasing market share) 
• The Spanish firm offers low priced but inferior quality batteries 
• The client’s forklift batteries are sold to industrial dealers by captive salesmen. 
• Free maintenance service is a part of every sale. 
• Purchases of automobile batteries in the consumer market are highly seasonal. 
• Larger customers are sophisticated in their buying practices, focusing decisions on both quality 
and price.  Smaller customers are less sophisticated and make purchase decisions based solely on 
price. 
• The client’s management style could be defined as ‘old school,’ with the original owner/founder 
still in charge. 
 
The Question(s): 
What recommendations would you have for this company?  
152 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 


===== PDF p102 =====
 
 
Suggested Solution 
 
Desired Framework:  [Check all that apply.] 
Cost-Revenue and 
Profitability  
The 4 P’s of Marketing 
The 3 C’s 
Value Chain Analysis 
Porter’s 5 Forces 
Microeconomic 
Analysis 
Internal-External 
Factors 
Other______________
______ 
 
Outline of Your Answer - Important questions asked, additional information divulged, 
assumptions, and logic:  [Walk us through how you arrived at your answer in detail.] 
 
The Spanish product is inferior in quality and may offer buyers a worse deal in the long run, 
but is targeted to smaller dealers who buy only on the basis of price.  Service is not a 
problem for these smaller dealers who do not know much about preventive maintenance, so 
the product appears a better deal. 
 
Issues addressed: 
• Market Segmentation:  Differences between large vs. small customers – size, needs, 
buying behavior 
• Product/Service Bundling:  How do different segments want to but our services 
according to their needs (stand-alone or bundled?)?  What is better for us? 
• Customer Profitability:  How can we best profit in each segment? 
• Competitor Analysis:  What do competitors offer?  What segments do they serve?  
Do they have flexibility with respect to cost, product functionality, and price? 
 
Option 1:  Establish an Off-Brand 
1. An off-brand would allow the firm to develop a product better positioned in the 
forklift battery business (perhaps of lesser quality but more price competitive), while 
maintaining its product quality image in the automobile industry. 
2. Cost savings with an off-brand could come from: 
• Redesign of product using cheaper materials or a different manufacturing 
process. 
• Offer the free maintenance service as an option, not a guarantee quoted as 
part of price in the low-end segment.  Keep product and service bundled in 
high-end segment. 
• Eliminate the sales force and sell factory-direct to industry dealers or use brokered 
distribution. 
3. Sell the current product at a cheaper price with a strategy to promote market share 
instead of current profits. 
 
Option 2:  Focus Sales and Marketing Efforts to Educate the Consumer Market  
                                                                                                                                                        153 
Management Consulting Club  
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
 


===== PDF p103 =====
1. Develop and promote product positioning.  Offer warranties, long-run cost-savings 
estimates, etc. to send quality signals that competitors cannot match.  Communicate ‘true 
cost’ of buying low-priced batteries and try to change consumer-buying behavior. 
2. Leverage strength of quality leadership position in automotive markets. 
3. Focus only on high-end of forklift battery market and target larger dealers.  Set higher prices 
to signal quality and extract highest level of consumer surplus.  Refocusing of resources 
would need to be evaluated in terms of dedicated assets and return on investment. 
 
Option 3:  Exit the Forklift Battery Business 
1. If competing in this industry means lowering quality standards may be putting core 
automotive business at risk. 
2. May be able to find other opportunities that better fit with company’s strengths and image. 
• Forward integration into end products – industrial loaders and equipment, golf carts, etc. 
• Backward integration into chemicals, plastics, etc. 
 
Option 4:  Do Nothing 
1. Wait to see how market reacts to product over a longer period of time or to minor marketing 
changes 
2. Difficult to sell this strategy to owner given investment in expensive consulting advice, 
although this may in fact be the most logical approach. 
 
154 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
