===== PDF p163 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
159 
 
37. Publishing Company (Parthenon R1, Other, Growth Strategy, 
Balanced) 
Stem: Our client is a major book publishing company. They've noticed recently that their revenues are 
down by 1% while the industry, on average, is up by 3-4%. They want us to help them figure out the 
cause for this reduction in revenue, and what they can do to reverse the trend. 
 
Candidate should layout their structure which should include gaining an understanding of the company's 
profitability and product mix by book genre and trends. 
 
When asked, interviewer should reveal the following data: 
 
Revenue by Genre (product mix is the same as the competition): 
 
Genre growth: 
● 
History: no movement 
● 
Romance: up 1% 
● 
Mystery: up 1% 
● 
Fantasy: ??? 
● 
Bibles: no movement 
 
Interviewer: Can you tell me what is happening with Fantasy revenues? 
 
Candidate: Sure. First, I’d like to clarify these growth numbers per genre. Are these the growth numbers 
for the total industry or the growth of our particular company? Although there is usually a positive 
correlation between industry growth and company growth, sometimes this does not hold. 
 
Interviewer: Good point. These numbers are the growth for our client, not the industry. 
 
Candidate: Great. Since overall revenue is down by 1% and there has been no movement in History or 
Bibles, all of the revenue shift is coming from the other 3 genres. Romance is contributing positive 0.2% 
(1% * 20%), as is Mystery. So, Fantasy must be pulling down overall revenue by (negative) 1.4% (0.4% + 
1%). Since Fantasy contributes 25% of overall revenue, Fantasy revenues must have been down 5.6% 
(1.4% ÷ 25%). 
 
Interviewer: OK, good, what customer segment do you think is the driver of Fantasy segment sales? 
 
Candidate should brainstorm with interviewer. 


===== PDF p164 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
160 
 
Candidate: Well, a lot of segments come to mind, actually. More recently, books like Twilight have 
brought in a lot of teenage girls, and potentially their mothers. Harry Potter has an even younger 
audience, which means their parents are actually the purchasers. These books also appealed to 
teenagers and those in their twenties, albeit a little less so. More classically, I think of books like Lord of 
the Rings, which probably brings in predominantly males in their twenties and thirties. 
 
Interviewer: Interesting thoughts. We’ve actually done a little market research and know that the main 
customer segment for Fantasy sales is women aged 22-40, specifically stay-at-home moms. So, with this 
information about the segment, what are some issues that could be driving the negative trend in sales? 
 
Candidate: Perhaps this company has different authors or less attractive products than the competitors? 
Or maybe a less robust selection? 
 
Interviewer: No, our company’s selection/offerings are no different than the competition. 
 
Interviewer should continue to push the candidate to brainstorm until the candidate arrives at differences 
in retail strategy. 
 
Interviewer: Where does this customer segment buy books? 
 
Candidate: Probably at malls, department stores, grocery stores, drug stores, anywhere a stay-at-home- 
mom would already be running errands. I would imagine they are also purchasing online at an increasing 
rate to get the best prices. 
 
Interviewer: OK, well, it turns out that we are in all the same retail outlets as our competitors, but we are 
having far fewer sales in grocery stores and drug stores. Why might that be? 
 
Candidate and Interviewer should brainstorm until candidate asks about where the books are located in 
the store. 
 
Interviewer: Ah, good question. As it turns out, Fantasy books purchased by this customer segment are 
usually impulse buys. The retailers (grocery stores and drug stores, in this case) had not been locating 
the books near the registers, where impulse buys occur. 
 
No formal recommendation is needed for this case. It is important that the candidate stays calm 
throughout these difficult brainstorming sessions, and shows his/her creativity in arriving at these 
conclusions. 
