===== PDF p25 =====
CASE 10:  ALCOHOL DISTRIBUTION (Booz Allen – Rd 1)        SUPPLY CHAIN 
 
The client is a US market-leading alcohol manufacturer.  They are considering restructuring 
their distribution strategy and want to know if they should have one or 50 distribution centers. 
 
 
Additional Information Provided After Relevant Questions: 
 
20
 
• Distribution centers lie in between the bottling plants (all over the US) and the customers. 
• Customers are the spirits retailers. 
 
 
Interviewee’s Solution: 
 
I drew a list of advantages of 1 versus 50 distribution centers: 
Advantages of 1: cost of location/real estate; cost of labor in warehouse; less inventory needed (less 
deviation of demand); better management/infrastructure efficiencies; costs of breakage lower (less 
moving, less “bumps,” fewer breakage opportunities).   
Advantage of 50: reduced risk (fire in one distribution center and you have serious problems if that’s 
the only center); less time involved in order process. 
 
I then drew a map of the United States and determined transportation costs would be less. 
 
Twist added: Given to me that the total cost of 50 distribution centers would be $600MM while total 
cost of 1 distribution center would be $500MM, but CFO still decided to go with 50 distribution 
centers.  I was asked why I think he went with that decision.   
 
Conversation included hedging risk is a huge factor not easily quantifiable, but that customer service 
(proximity to customers makes response faster) would result in more loyal customers and result in 
higher acquisition and retention rates of customers. 
 
 
Commentary/Recommendations: 
 
I would analyze this case using the following framework: 
 
Our client should adopt whichever distribution network is the most profitable unless there are 
compelling risk factors or long term strategic issues that demand otherwise. So in making the decision 
there are three primary areas we need to explore: 
• Costs – what are the incremental costs associated with using 50 distribution centers instead of 
one central warehouse. 
o What are the transitional costs or one-time set up costs associated with moving away 
from the existing distribution network? 
o What are the real estate/plant costs associated with running 50 warehouses? 
Presumably this is significantly more than having one enormous warehouse. 
o What are the transportation costs associated with running 50 separate warehouses? 
Presumably running 50 warehouses creates some savings because each of the routes is 
far shorter than if we only have one national warehouse but there may be some 
interesting issues if running 50 warehouses means we are not operating at scale. 


===== PDF p26 =====
o What are the personnel costs associated with 50 warehouses? Presumably this would 
involve significantly more staff and we would have a duplication of functions that 
could be avoided by operating one warehouse? 
o What are the capacity/stock keeping costs? Pooling resources normally enables 
smoothing of demand fluctuations. We anticipate that the total inventory held at all 50 
warehouses would be higher than if fluctuations could be smoothed by using only one 
warehouse. 
• Revenue – what is the net revenue impact from expanding the number of distribution centers? 
o Will we be better able to service our customers’ needs by having 50 distribution centers 
and therefore be able to increase demand and sales revenue? 
o Will having a “local” presence enhance the image or reputation of the firm and help 
increase sales. 
o Will we have a better understanding of market conditions by having employees on the 
ground in 50 locations and therefore operate in a more responsive fashion helping to 
increase sales. 
• Strategic/Risk Factors – are there factors that cannot easily be quantified in the revenue and 
cost analysis that make one structure more preferable. 
o What is our exposure if there is a fire in our one warehouse? 
o What is our exposure if there is a local transport strike that affects our one warehouse? 
Similarly what if there is an adverse weather event e.g. snowstorm that impacts our one 
distribution center? 
o From a strategic perspective are we better off having 50 centers so that we can more 
rapidly respond and grow in one area if necessary? 
o Do we need 50 centers because this is what competitors do and this is what our 
customers will expect/demand? 
o Do we need 50 centers from an internal cost monitoring perspective? e.g. the 50 centers 
can be benchmarked against each other. Best practices rolled out across the whole 
system. Inefficiency may be less visible if there is only one center. 
 
 
 
 
 
21
