===== PDF p41 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
37 
!"Somehow, I don’t like using a country risk premium. It seems very arbitrary. I’m not 
convinced how or why such a premium is applied. But I agree theoreticians tend to 
recommend using something like this. 
 
At this stage, I was not going to argue with my interviewer. I vaguely agreed with him, but 
thankfully we were well out of time and he said he’d love to chat with me about this later. I 
found out through the course of the interview that I was being considered for the Corporate 
Finance & Strategy practice, though I had not explicitly expressed an interest in this practice. 


===== PDF p42 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
38 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
 
The client is a division of an industrial chemicals firm. They are in the business of manufacturing 
fibers and have had sales of $1 billion. Their concern is that the sales have been declining 
steadily over the past five years. Their objective is to identify three to five new lines of business 
with total revenues of $300-500 million utilizing existing capacity in the fiber manufacturing 
facilities. They have come up with a new fiber that has very good absorbency, something like 10 
times its weight, which is a breakthrough in the industry. The client is looking to enter the urban 
pet care market in the U.S. with this new high-absorbency fiber. They want to manufacture pet 
care pads, sort of diapers for pets in urban areas. The client would like us to evaluate the 
potential of this idea, which is where you come in. 
 
I would explore the following areas and in the process hopefully glean insights to whether or not 
the pet care diaper sounds like an attractive option for our client. First, I’d like to learn more 
about the client. Then I’d like to understand the market potential, then assess competitive trends 
and finally focus on the particular product in question and the client’s ability to execute with 
regard to bringing this product to market.  
 
!"Sounds good. 
 
Can you tell me more about the client’s strengths? 
 
!"Well, they are an established industrial products manufacturer, their fibers are 
specifically used in the fashion apparel industry and for the manufacture of cigarette 
filters. They’ve had sales in the billion-dollar range, so they are reasonably big. 
 
Do we know how strong their brand is in the customer’s mind? How strong are their marketing 
skills? The reason I ask is to understand whether or not our client is best suited to bring this 
product to market, if there is demand for it. 
 
!"Their brand is pretty well known, but not necessarily directly by the end customer. They 
have not done any marketing in the traditional sense and have no advertising experience 
at all.  
 
Oh, I see. If they traditionally have not interacted directly with the customer, how does their 
value chain look like? 
 
!"Good question. They deal largely with distributors, who in turn sell the products to 
retailers. The retailers handle the relationship with the end customers. 
 
Great. I’d like to modify my original framework slightly and explore this value chain a little 
further. How powerful are these intermediaries, and would the client want to continue to use 
them in bringing the pet sponge to market?  
 
!"The client prefers to continue using the intermediaries. They are reluctant to try things 
that they are not necessarily experienced in. The intermediaries know this and 
consequently the distributors would demand a 50% markup while the retailers would 
require a 100% markup. 


===== PDF p43 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
39 
 
Interesting! Why don’t I move to the next area of my original framework, market potential? Do 
we have any research on the size of this market? 
 
!"Not really but how would you go about sizing the market? 
 
Well, I’d try to get a sense for the size of the urban pet owner market. Let’s assume that of the 
100 million households, 40% or 40 million households are urban households. Of these, let’s 
assume that 40% of the households, i.e., 16 million households, own pets. I’m considering only 
dogs and cats as relevant pets for the product. Let’s further assume that each of these households 
has 1.5 pets. This results in about 24 million urban pets that are potential users of the sponge in 
question. I don’t have a good idea how often these sponges would need to be replaced. I know 
my niece goes through 4 to 6 diapers per day. This is probably too high. 
 
!"You’re right. Remember these are high absorbency sponges, but its not clear how 
tolerant pet owners would be to the smell. # Let’s assume that they would want to 
replace the sponge every other day. 
 
OK, that would result in 24 million times about 180 sponges a year or 4.32 billion sponges 
annually. Wow, that seems like a pretty big number! With a 20% market share, our client should 
be able to sell – assuming that there is a customer need for it – about 800 million pads annually. 
Before I figure out the dollar value of this market, let me try to understand if there are any 
competitive products in the market, how they are priced and if indeed there is a demand for these 
products. 
 
!"Well, there is no major national brand out there. Local pet stores tend to sell such pads 
for about 50 cents per pad. The demand is quite small and sales are restricted to the 
local stores.  
 
Is our client’s proposed product any different from these local brands? 
 
!"Not really. It has much higher absorbency – that’s about it. 
 
Hmmm. I wonder how our client hopes to differentiate this product and market it to the customer. 
At any rate, let me assess the dollar revenue potential that this product is likely to generate. If the 
product is priced at the current market levels of 50 cents a sponge, the 100% retailer markup 
means that the distributor receives 25 cents and the 50% distributor markup would leave the 
client with only a little over 16 cents per sponge. With an ambitious annual sales estimate of 800 
million pads, the revenue potential is about $128 million.  
 
!"Is this good enough? 
 
Well, you did mention that the client is looking for 3 to 5 product ideas with $100 million 
revenue potential each. This product idea meets this metric, but its not even clear if there is a 
customer need for the product and I’m not convinced the client has the execution quotient to 
bring this product to market. 
 
