===== PDF p154 =====
Round 1
Case 21: RDTC
Prompt
RDTC is a large public accounting firm with over $3B in revenues and over 8,000 employees. Over the past 
three years the firm has been working to overcome challenges identified in their practice through an 
organization-wide change initiative. There are two key components of this change initiative—a brand new 
technology called LCS and a suite of tools, resources, and methodologies to ensure streamlined processes 
called RDTC Project Management.  RDTC Project Management (RDTC PM) is the driving force behind the 
new RDTC Methodology to performing audits while LCS is simply the new software that will allow auditors to 
successfully execute this new methodology.  This is also the first time in the history of the organization that 
project management has been emphasized and used to evaluate performance of staff. 
RDTC is entering the third year of this change initiative and is at a critical inflection point with both LCS and 
RDTC PM. LCS has rolled out to all of the small and medium project teams but is now set to deploy to all 
large accounts. These large accounts bring in the most revenue for RDTC, have the largest teams, require 
the most staff hours, and have most senior audit partners leading them. 
Deployment of RDTC PM has had several challenges. One of the most important aspects has been the role 
creation and hiring of 50 new, full-time project managers to enhance RDTC’s project management 
capabilities; thereby ensuring a consistent methodology for performing audits.  RDTC forecasted that the 50 
new project managers would be assigned to the 70 largest project teams by this year. So far only 20 have 
been hired and assigned to 30 project teams teams. In addition, the existing project managers have met 
resistance from the account teams who are not accustomed to having project management oversight. 
The adoption of this change initiative is essential to ensuring that RDTC stays competitive in the 
market and avoids penalties from the oversight board. They want you to develop a plan for the next 
year of their change initiative. They want these questions and considerations addressed in your plan:
How do we prioritize the challenges that their change initiative is facing?
What should they consider as LCS prepares to deploy to large engagements?
How can we attract new project managers and focus on ensuring success of the ones?
Possible 2nd level question if candidate brings up issue: The other 30 project teams have started assigning 
project management responsibilities to people within their team instead of waiting on a trained project 
manager. What are the potential risks associated with this approach? How would you address this problem?
150


===== PDF p155 =====
Guidance
Guiding Questions: 
When was the last time RDTC updated its software?
They have been operating on their legacy system for the past 15-20 years, so not recently.
How successful was the LCS roll out to small and medium engagements?
It was met with a lot of resistance from audit personnel. To convert to LCS, engagement teams are supposed to submit 
software conversion requests. Teams consistently missed deadlines to submit conversion requests
How is RDTC organized?
They are organized in regional divisions—East, West, and Central. Each region has the same leadership structure with one 
regional president, VP, and office leads. The project teams’ clients are all within their region. Project Managers are 
supposed to be assigned to project teams within their region, but because there is a shortage many have had to work with 
teams outside of their region.
What slowed the hiring of new project managers? (If they ask this question—ask them to brainstorm ideas first.)
Several things have slowed progress. 
1. The career path for new project managers is not fully established thereby reducing the attractiveness of the option
2. The training has not been fully developed so leadership does not feel comfortable with hiring additional project 
managers
3. The opportunity has not been communicated across the organization
4. Right now they are only recruiting internally at experienced auditors who desire a career change, but could be open to 
considering outside candidates
Is there anything preventing them from hiring new project managers?
Right now, they are waiting until the end of busy season to hire additional project managers. They will not be able to hire 
anymore for six months.
Is engagement team leadership bought in to this initiative?
Because senior managers, partners, and directors are accustomed to the legacy technology, many have not submitted 
request to convert to LCS and are reluctant to do so. Many of them also do not understand the benefits of project 
management and do not understand the purpose of project managers. There are a few champions within the 
organization however, but everyone is not aligned on what this change means
Case 21: RDTC
151


===== PDF p156 =====
Performance 
Evaluation
Candidates have the opportunity be creative in their approach and framework, but should clearly create and 
communicate their structure and plan. Feel free to ask probing questions in any of these areas to push the candidate to 
think further on these topics. A good framework should include these elements and considerations. 
The candidate should avoid discussing what competitors are doing and should think more broadly than a tech adoption 
case.
An exceptional candidate will also consider 
PEOPLE
Leadership alignment: Importance of change coming from leadership; How to ensure key stakeholders are aware of 
benefits and are communicating that to direct reports; How do we get all of leadership bought in to change initiative 
Candidate could discuss a change curve to prioritize who is most important and how to encourage adoption of initiative
Learning: Onboarding training program for new project managers is critical as the organization is creating a new role; 
Develop tools and resources for engagement teams who do not have a project manager yet; What type of learning 
should be developed for project teams that are unfamiliar with project management oversight
Possible development of a Center of Excellence for both areas of change initiative
Key Stakeholders: Audit personnel; Engagement teams; Leadership; Clients; Current project managers and potential 
candidates
PROCESSES
Communications: How is RDTC communicating the availability of the project manager role?; Use of strategic 
communications to announce technology change and benefits of change initiative to engagement teams
Project Management: How to handle engagement teams who have not been assigned a project manager; How to 
utilize existing project managers so they are not too stretched
TECHNOLOGY
LCS adoption: Perform a pilot and phased roll out; Identify “Super Users” or utilize “Train the trainer” philosophy to help 
auditors understand and use new technology 
Case 21: RDTC
152
