===== PDF p32 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
28 
 
Case 8: Gas Stations and Convenience Stores 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm:        McKinsey & Company 
Round:     2005 Summer, First 
Content:   Brainstorming, largely qualitative 
 
CASE TOPIC 
 
Our client is major global oil company that owns the whole value chain: oil rigs, refining, 
distribution, and retail.  Our direct contact is the CEO of the global retail operation.  His 
operation consists of 1) gas sold at the pumps and 2) the convenience stores at the gas station.  
Profitability of the retail operation has declined, and the CEO would like us to help figure out 
why and to come up with a plan for the next five years. 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
This case is representative of many of the prepared, McKinsey round 1 cases, in which the 
interviewer actively walks the interviewee through a set of qualitative and quantitative questions.  
The interviewer should “stick to the script” of questions.  To the effect that the interviewee 
struggles, the interviewer can assist the interviewee to get back on track. 
 
The interviewee should be structured in answering qualitative questions and crunch through any 
numbers thrown his or her way, always keeping in mind how they tie back to the larger issues. 
 
CASE QUESTIONS 
 
Over the past fifteen years, the number of gas stations worldwide has declined by six percent.   
 
Q: What might be the causes of this? 
A: Possible answers include 
• Consolidation 
• Increase in dollar volume per station 
• Changing population patterns (fewer rural stations) 
• More stations open 24 hours (so fewer stations needed) 
 
Set of questions re: comparative gas station profitability 
 
It turns out there have been two other changes in the market. One, the number of gas stations 
with convenience stores attached has increased.  Two, a major new entrant has begun taking 
market share.  Supermarkets have begun opening gas stations in their parking lots.  This is not 
yet a major competitor in the US, where they only have ten percent of the market, but 
supermarkets have 30% of the gas market in the UK, and 60% in France. 
 


===== PDF p33 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
29 
 
The next task is to understand whether the supermarkets have a better business model than the 
gas stations in this market, and if so, why.  We’ll use the metric of Return on Invested Capital – 
operating profit / invested capital. 
 
The numbers for the UK supermarket are as follows: they sell ten million litres of gas per year at 
72 cents/litre.  Their cost is 20 cents/litre.  They pay 45 cents/liter in tax.  The convenience 
store’s operating profit is 500,000 pounds per year.  Overhead in the industry is typically ten 
percent of fuel sales, and that’s accurate here.  The capital cost is two million pounds. 
 
We’ll compare it to one of our typical gas station locations: downtown, one of our busiest 
locations.  This location sells six million litres per year at 75 cents/litre; its cost and tax per litre 
are the same as the supermarket.  Convenience store profit is 20% lower than the supermarket’s.  
Overhead is still ten percent of fuel sales, and capital costs are four million pounds. 
 
Q: What is the ROIC of the supermarket? A: (24%)  (It also may come out here that the 
convenience store is responsible for all the profits.) 
 
Q: Without running the numbers, what do you think our client’s gas station’s ROIC will 
be?  Why?  A: (Much lower – because of the cost of capital).   
 
Q: What do you think causes that high cost of capital?  A: (downtown location – 
supermarkets typically in the suburbs.)   
 
Q: So, given that, what other things that drive ROIC might we be able to affect?  A: (Likely 
can’t change cost or tax – could lower price to sell more gas – could move out of the city – could 
attempt to increase convenience store profitability.) 
 
Client recommendation: 
The client agrees with our recommendation to focus on the convenience store, and decides to set 
a pilot program in 1,000 stores.   
 
Q: What type of new products should he introduce? How would you think about what 
products to introduce?  [Interviewee was required to come up with eight answers – near the end 
he was helped along with “Think about what we’d ask if he came to us with product A and 
product B – what would we ask to be able to decide between those two.”] 
  
A: Some factors we could use to decide were: 
-What does the existing customer want 
-What products have high margins 
-What can we (and the supplier) support logistically 
-What can we get from existing suppliers 
-What can we link to products that already sell well 
-What products are needed frequently / will drive visits 
-What products are durable 
-What products require little shelf space (space at a premium in these stores). 


===== PDF p34 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
30 
 
 
In the end the decision was made to introduce hot and cold food – high-margin, low shelf-space, 
high-frequency (but low durability).   McK is currently implementing in Europe.  End of case. 
 
 
