===== PDF p65 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
61 
The client is a major pharmaceutical company.  It has two new drugs in development, both of 
which are prescription treatment-type drugs (as opposed to preventative drugs) for osteoporosis, 
a disease that affects older women.  The development period for new drugs is ten years, but the 
last three years – which involve testing – consume more than half of the cost.  Thus, the client 
wants you to decide whether to test the two drugs, test one of the drugs, or to abandon the drugs 
altogether. 
 
!"First, however, I’d like to ask you to think through two problems for me.  One is, what is the 
size of the potential market for osteoporosis, and two, how do you think the markets for 
preventative drugs and treatment drugs differ? 
 
Okay, to begin with, let’s estimate the size of the market for osteoporosis drugs.  I’ll assume that 
we’re only looking at the United States for the moment, so the population of the U.S. is about 
270 million, slightly more than half of which is women.  So say there are 135 million women in 
the U.S.  I think osteoporosis begins to be a concern in women over 50, so we need to figure out 
how many women are over fifty. 
 
!"Just estimate broadly. 
 
Okay, well, my guess is that about 25% of the population is over 50, so that’s about 35 million 
potential customers – and we should remember that as the population ages, more people will fall 
into this category, so potential customers will increase.  Naturally, for a treatment drug, we 
would then need to get the rates of incidence (to find out what percentage of women in the 
correct age group actually develop osteoporosis) and whether that is trending up or down. 
 
!"That’s good, and it leads into the next question.  How would the size of the market be 
different with a preventative drug? 
 
Well, the number of people willing to take a preventative drug would depend on several things.  
First, the randomness of the disease – I don’t know much about osteoporosis, but if there’s a 
clear high-risk group, and few others get the disease, then those people are likely to be customers 
but people outside the group are not.  On the other hand, if the disease is really random in whom 
it strikes, then more people are at risk, but with a lower risk for each person.  Thus, people would 
make their decisions based on the cost of preventing the disease balanced against the 
consequences of getting it.  So, if there’s a treatment available that minimizes the problems 
associated with getting the disease, then few people will take the prevention.  On the other hand, 
if the disease is not treatable and has severe consequences, many people will want to take 
preventative measures.  Then, it’ll come down to very pragmatic factors – is the drug easy to take 
– I mean, is it a simple pill every morning or is it several pills a day with restrictions on diet, etc?  
Will it be covered by insurance?  Are there side effects?  If the side effects are severe, they will 
cancel out the benefits of preventing the disease! 
 
!"So tell me what the differences would be in marketing a preventative drug versus a treatment 
drug, and what factors would affect the sales volumes of each. 
 
(Here I took a minute to sketch down some items in two columns). 
 


===== PDF p66 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
62 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Okay, I’d say the first difference is going to be in whom the target for advertising is.  Patients 
already suffering from a disease will go to a doctor, so doctors will be the ones making choices 
among competing drugs.  For a preventative drug, however, the patient will likely have more 
influence, because even if it’s a prescription drug, they may or may not choose to take it, and 
they may find one drug more convenient than another and thus make a choice (while patients 
suffering a disease are likely to put up with inconvenience to make themselves feel better).   
 
!"Okay, how would that change the marketing? 
 
Well, my guess is that doctors will respond most to effectiveness – because they will likely be 
more scientific and have done more of their own research (even if it’s just talking to colleagues) 
about a drug than patients.  So that’s the most important thing to stress.  Patients, however, will 
be less attuned to the science behind the medicine, and will also be very conscious of side 
effects, convenience, etc. So a treatment drug would be mainly advertised in medical 
publications and similar areas, with a stress on the effectiveness of the medication.  A 
preventative drug, however, would likely be advertised more broadly, targeting the group that 
might be at risk for the disease, and stressing the awful consequences of getting the disease and 
how easy and safe it is to take the prevention. 
 
!"Okay, that’s good.  Let’s talk about the client’s problem.  Should he spend the money to 
finish developing the two drugs? 
 
Are they treatment drugs or preventative drugs? 
 
!"At the moment they’re treatment drugs, although they could be preventative drugs in the 
future.  The normal pattern is for drugs to come out as treatments, because longer testing is 
required to prove value as a preventative.  So the drug will be released as a treatment and 
then the company would continue testing to see if it has value as a preventative.  But 
consider the shorter-term possibilities as a treatment drug. 
 
(At this point, I drew the following McKinsey-style “issue tree.”  I basically then read it off to 
him). 
 
Okay, first I’d look at the consequences of the two choices – to test or not to test.  For the 
decision to test, I’d want to look at the likelihood of success, to find out whether success was 
likely in general and whether the two drugs had different chances of being successful.  (Etc., etc. 
for the whole tree). 
 


===== PDF p67 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
63 
 
Likelihood of Success are the two drugs’ chances  
 
 
 
different? 
 
 
 
 
is success likely? 
 
Test (1 or both) 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost of Test 
 
same for both?  
Decision 
delivery convenience (pill/shot 
etc). 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential Market 
 
side effects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revenue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frequency (how sold per 
treatment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential to lose share or position in market 
 
 
Don’t Test 
 
 
 
!"Okay, those are all important issues.  Is there one thing you’d want to find out first? 
 
Yes, I’d want to find out about competition - are we the first company to develop a treatment for 
osteoporosis?  If not, is our treatment significantly different? 
 
!"That’s a crucial question.  No.  In fact, both drugs we’re producing are essentially the same 
as drugs our competitors already have out on the market? 
 
Are we producing generic drugs that will cost less? 
 
!"No, we would not compete on price. 
 
Does anything else distinguish our drugs?  More effective?  Fewer side effects?  Anything? 
 
!"No. 
 
How well have the existing drugs done? 
 
!"They’ve done very well.  They’re the dominant treatments of the disease. 
 
So we’re just going to duplicate their drugs to enter the market? 
 
!"Yes.  Our drugs will work in essentially the same way as the existing drugs. 
 


===== PDF p68 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
64 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Okay, so to be successful, we’d have to differentiate our product somehow, or maybe our size in 
the market would allow us to gain share just by entering the market – because of purchasing 
arrangements, brand name, etc. 
 
!"No, the competitors are just as big as we are.  How would you go about differentiating a 
product that nearly duplicates an existing product in the market? 
 
Well, one way would be advertising, so that you could potentially make patients ask for our drug 
over the others.  Another way would be on cost, but we don’t want to do that.  We might have 
certain distribution channel advantages – contracts with hospitals, insurance companies, 
drugstores, etc, to exploit to help. 
 
!"Anything else? 
 
Ummmm.  (I think he was looking for a specific additional point, but I couldn’t think of anything 
else. So he let me off the hook). 
 
!"Well, that is okay.  What would your recommendation be? 
 
It doesn’t seem like it’s worth investing all the money when there doesn’t seem to be a clear way 
to steal share from the existing products.  On the other hand, a big provider or drugs may not 
want to be left out of a particular market, for fear of losing other markets to a competitor with a 
full range of products. 
 
!"That makes sense.  What if I told you that we found out while doing our research that a small 
start-up company on the West Coast was developing a new type of treatment that would 
essentially make the existing treatment obsolete? 
 
What are its chances of being a technical success?  And when would it come out? 
 
!"We are fairly certain it will work if the firm can get financing to undertake the expensive last 
three years of development.  We even know how the new drug works.  They’re about to begin 
that right now – so it’ll be at least three years until it reaches market. 
 
Then, first of all, I’d probably cancel testing of the existing drugs immediately even the 
possibility that the drug will become obsolete adds to the problems of the crowded marketplace 
and makes it a bad investment.  If we’re fairly certain that the drug will succeed, it’s unlikely 
they won’t be able to find someone to finance the testing. 
 
!"What would you tell the client to do? 
 
Well, he could do a few things.  If there is a chance that the start-up will get delayed in bringing 
the new drug to market, we could use what we know to develop it ourselves and beat them to 
market.  But they’ve got a seven-year head-start on us, if our development takes the standard ten-
year period.  We could try to hamper their development somehow – perhaps using our size in the 
market – but that wouldn’t work for long anyway.  They’re a small company? 
 


===== PDF p69 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
65 
!"Yes. 
 
And the client is a large company with lots of resources? 
 
!"Yes. 
 
Well, then maybe they should buy the start-up – that way, the start-up would get its capital, and 
the client would have a new drug that would trounce the competition in only three years. 
 
!"Good.  That’s what we told them, and that’s what they did. 
