===== PDF p26 =====
Case 1: Southwright Med Device 
Prompt 
A medical equipment manufacturer in the southeastern U.S. has called you in because it feels its 
working capital requirements are much higher than those of its competitors. How will you help it 
solve its problem? 
Guidance 
This is a financial accounting case focused on a medical device company. The discussion should be 
conversational but exacting on details. There are no handouts so the candidate should rely on the 
general data given/created by the interviewer. The basic objective of this case is to test knowledge 
of the Balance Sheet and how it applies to business operations. 
 
Read this information well before you administer the case. Manage the case discussion and allow 
the candidate to formulate a plan based on the assumptions and key evidence provided below 
(case-specific). Offer prompts when necessary and provide the following information if he/she 
responds correctly and directly to the stimulus offered. 
 
CA & CL: Let the candidate identify the need of Current Assets (CA) and Current Liabilities (CL). 
Provide this information on request:  ―Current assets consist of cash, inventory, and accounts 
receivable and current liabilities consist of accounts payable and short term debts.‖ 
 
Company: Provide this information if the candidate asks for the background of the company:  
The company is made up of three divisions. The high inventory problem can be traced to a division 
acquired by the client about two years ago. The division manufactures equipment for arthroscopic 
surgery, namely capital equipment and blades which sell are similar to razors and razor blades, just 
much more sophisticated and expensive.  
 
Inventory: If the candidate asks about inventory and indicates that the inventory could be very high, 
prompt him/her to discuss possible reasons for inventories to be high. 
 
An ideal answer would consist of: sales, poor forecasting, obsolescence. 
Accounting 
Unknown round 
Deloitte 
22 


===== PDF p27 =====
23 
Guidance 
If the candidate asks for the reasons for inventory problem, explain to the candidate that technology 
has been changing rapidly and the rate of obsolescence is extremely high. As earlier sales forecasts 
(shortly after the acquisition) had been overly optimistic, the client now finds itself loaded with 
obsolescent finished goods inventory. Then ask the candidate to recommend correction actions to 
remedy the problem. 
 
An ideal recommendation should touch upon these points:  
Determine appropriate levels of inventory such that excess inventory is reduced and 
customer demands are met. 
 Factors that should be considered - Product demand, manufacturing lead times, customer 
expectations on order lead times. 
Prompt – 
Part II 
The client has 2.5 years of capital equipment finished goods inventory while NONE needs to be 
carried since these items can be manufactured after receiving the order (i.e. The finished good 
product is no longer sold.) What are the next steps? 
Guidance 
An ideal answer would look like this: 
 
With respect to technology, while certain aspects of the product may have changed substantially, 
other are just as likely to have stayed similar to what was previously used and could be salvaged. 
One could dismantle the product and reuse parts to manufacture the new devices. Selling off the 
inventory to distributors in less advanced healthcare markets is another way to salvage some of the 
investment. Alternately write off the non salvageable component parts. 
 
Once the candidate provide satisfactory answer, ask to wrap up. 
Accounting 
Unknown round 
Deloitte 
Case 1: Southwright Med Device 


===== PDF p28 =====
24 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Expected: 
The candidate clearly identifies the importance of CA & CL and explores each of these two further. 
The candidate asks questions regarding company and indentifies Inventory as a problem. After the 
candidate gets the information on inventory problem, he/she recommends some corrective actions. 
The candidate is also able to recommend next steps for prompt2. 
 
Good: 
The candidate not only performs the analysis in a methodical way identifying all major items but 
his/her recommendations also are very close to the ones stated earlier. The candidate does not 
need more than couple of prompts in pointing out all factors and reaching a conclusion. 
 
Excellent: 
The candidate identifies CA/CL early on and explains all possible elements under CA/CL and their 
relevance to the problem. The candidate is also able to quickly identify the problem with the 
inventory and explores all possible reasons for the problem in a very structured way. The 
candidate‘s recommendations on corrective actions and next steps are spot on. 
Accounting 
Unknown round 
Deloitte 
Case 1: Southwright Med Device 
