===== PDF p23 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
19
7. Kitchen Hardware                                _________________  
Type of Case: Profitability  
Difficulty: Moderate  
   
Opening  
   
Your client is a manufacturer of food processing and preparation equipment that is sold to 
households and restaurants. 70% of the goods are imported from China and Italy while 30% are 
manufactured locally. The client has been in the industry for over 80 years and has a very strong 
brand name. The client has experienced a 1% decline in sales for each of the last 5 years and a 
comparable drop in earnings over the same period. The client would like to understand why the 
sales and earnings have dropped and how to address the issues.  
   
Background  
   
Market  
•       95% of client’s revenue is to restaurants with the remainder going to households.  
•       Market growth: if interviewee asks about market growth, push back and ask them 
what they think. This is a mature market, so market growth is low.  
•       They service the entire US, equal parts Northeast, Northwest, and South.  
•       New competition has entered the market and copied their products.  
   
Company/products  
•       This is the client’s first experience with slumping sales.  
•       They have best brand in the industry in terms of quality and recognition. They price 
their products at a slight premium. Locally manufactured goods have slightly higher 
margins.  
•       Mix of products has changed slightly in the past few years. They sell their products 
to restaurant buying groups that represent a collection of restaurants. Competitors have 
begun offering complete kitchen solutions that include items the client does not currently 
produce.  
Costs  
•       COGS: There has been a slight increase in the price to the client of the imported 
goods, about a 2% rise every 3 years.  
•       Production costs: have not changed.  
•       Distribution costs: have increased slightly because of increased fuel costs from 
shipping the goods. The client contracts with shippers such as UPS or FedEx to deliver 
their products.  
   
Analysis  
   
Normal profitability analysis should be performed at a high level in order to arrive to the 
recommendations  
   


===== PDF p24 =====
 
 
Torch the Case 2009 
Copyright © 2009 by the Stern School of Business Management Consulting Association (Stern MCA).  
This edition is for exclusive use of members of the Stern MCA. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval library, or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic or physical – without expressed 
permission by the Stern MCA 
20
Recommended Conclusions  
   
Product lines  
•       To address the competitive pressures, the client could form a joint venture with 
other manufacturers to offer complete solutions or add new products to their existing 
lineup to compete more effectively.  
•       Interviewee should ask about profitability of the household business. There is no 
specific information, so ask the interviewee to brainstorm all of the things he/she would 
like to know about the consumer business  
o      Is it a growing market?  
o      If it is more profitable than the restaurant business? Ask interviewee what to 
do if it is and if it isn’t  
       If yes – try to grow the household side of the business, and ask 
interviewee to brainstorm ideas how  
       If no – Divest or spin off  this side of the business and focus on the 
core restaurant business  
Revenues  
•       Client has strongest brand name in the industry; interviewee should explore 
increasing price premium to reinforce their brand image as the best in class  
•       Promotions/Marketing – promote on chef reality shows, trade shows, higher-end 
restaurant chains (e.g. Morton’s)  
•       Explore margins and internal capabilities of selling direct to restaurants to bypass 
the buying groups and capture more of the restaurants’ willingness to pay  
•       Second-hand market – since restaurant business is highly competitive with 
restaurants going out of business frequently, the client could start a “certified pre-owned” 
business line for their products, similar to car dealerships. If interviewee suggests this, 
ask them to brainstorm the benefits and risks. Obvious benefit: high margin. Obvious 
risk: cannibalization  
•       Bundle products together to increase sales of companion items  
Costs  
•       Locally produced goods have higher margins  
o      Interviewee should explore building or renting additional production 
facilities or expanding existing ones to reduce reliance on lower margin imports. 
They should mention current factory utilization rates  
•       Or, try to squeeze foreign suppliers to reduce costs on imports 
