===== PDF p10 =====
Table of Contents 
 
6
Practice Case 2: Train engine manufacturer  
(A. T. Kearney - Round 2) 
 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:  
 
Our client is a Venture Capital company that has invested in a train 
engine manufacturing company. This company has been losing 
money, but the client thinks there is potential to turn it around. They 
would like to see a turnaround as early as one year. I have to meet 
with the Venture Capital company two days from today. Can you form 
an agenda for us? 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions 
 
• 
There are only two locomotive engine manufacturers in North America. 
• 
The customers are the big North American railroads, there is only one 
other competitor and they make engines similar to the ones built by 
this company. Price is the only differentiator. 
• 
The cycle from manufacturing to selling takes over one year. Since the 
sales cycle is over one year, any increase in revenues will not be 
realized before one year. Only cost savings would be immediately 
discernible. 
• 
60% of costs are for raw materials used in building a locomotive 
engine. 
 
III. Sample solution:  
 
• 
I focused my attention on raw materials. I looked at the demand 
forecasting currently employed by this business.  
• 
I then looked at the supplier market. Since there are only two 
locomotive engine manufacturers, I think that this company may have 
more bargaining power than the raw material suppliers. The company 
should be able to negotiate a better deal if this is indeed the case. 
• 
I enquired about the capacity utilizations of the suppliers to make sure 
that they are well positioned to satisfy increased demand from this 
company. 
• 
Then I looked into new technology, engineering designs that may help 
the company reduce its raw material costs. 
• 
Finally, I looked at the remaining cost buckets for this company ñ 
manufacturing, and sales. Though I suspect that the savings here 
would not be as pronounced as in raw materials, there may be 
immediate cost savings available from these activities as well. 
• 
After that, I would discuss options to increase revenues of the 
business. Perhaps we can look at shorter manufacturing time. Perhaps 
the company can introduce new models in existing markets, or new 
and existing models in new markets. The company could enter the 


===== PDF p11 =====
Table of Contents 
 
7
market for engines for different railroad gauges (meter gauge etc.). 
They could also introduce steam engines, coal engines and electric 
engines for new markets like Latin America. 
 
