===== PDF p112 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
108 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
How many gallons of ice cream are sold in the U.S. each year? 
 
Ice cream can be sold through retailers and restaurants.  First, let’s analyze the retail sales.  
Assume that of 250 million people in the US, 80% like to eat ice cream.  That makes 200 million 
possible consumers.  Ice cream sales are likely to be somewhat seasonal especially in northern 
states, so assume an average selling season of eight months in the North and ten months in the 
South, for an average of nine months for the whole country.  During the season, assume that 
people eat ice cream twice a month, and assume that the average serving is one pint.  Since there 
are eight pints in a gallon, retail sales will be: 200 million people x 9 months x 2 servings per 
month x 1 pint / 8 pints per gallon = 450 million gallons. 
 
Assume that 80% of the U.S. population frequents restaurants, and that they do so at a rate of 
twice per month on average.  That makes 250 million people x 80% x 12 months per year x 2 
visits per month = 4,800 million restaurant visits per month.  Assume that 50% of these 
restaurants offer ice cream.  That makes 4,800 million x 50% = 2,400 million possible purchases.  
Now assume that one out of ten times, the customer will order ice cream.  That adds up to 2,400 
million x 10% = 240 million purchases.  Now assume that the average serving is half a pint.  
Since there are 16 half pints in a gallon, the total restaurant purchases come out to be 240 million 
purchases / 16 servings per gallon = 15 million gallons. 
 
Total purchases of ice cream are 465 million gallons per year.  Do a quick sanity check by 
dividing this number by 250 million people, which means that the average annual frozen yogurt 
consumption is 465/250 or a little less than 2 gallons per head of the population – that seems to 
be reasonable. 
 
 
Are there two dogs in the world with the same number of hairs? 
 
After a one-minute silence, the interviewer suggested that I divide the problem in 2 parts: 
 
1. How many different possibilities are there for the number of hairs in a dog? 
2. How many dogs are there in the world? 
 
To find out the number of different possibilities of hair in a dog, I started by figuring out the hair-
covered area of the smallest dog in the world and the largest dog in the world. 
 
Approximate the body of a dog using geometrical figures:  1 cylinder for the body, four cylinders 
for the leg, 1 cylinder for the tail, 1 cylinder for the neck and 1 rectangular prism for the head. 
 
For simplicity, the interviewer suggested that I used only the body area to calculate the number 
of hairs. 
 
The area around a cylinder equals:  π  x  diameter  x  length. 
 
Each of the cylinders’ two lids has an area of:  π  x  radius 2. 
 
Therefore, the total area of the cylinder equals: 


===== PDF p113 =====
Estimation Cases 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
109 
π  x  diameter  x  length  +  2  x  π  x  (diameter/2) 2. 
 
I assumed the smallest dog in the world to be a newborn Chihuahua with a length of 10 cm and a 
diameter of 3 cm.  Thus, the area of the newborn Chihuahua is (the interviewer allowed me to 
use π=3) 103.5 cm2. 
 
For the largest dog in the world I used an adult Saint Bernard with a length of 150 cm and a 
diameter of 50 cm.  The area in the Saint Bernard’s body is, therefore, 26,250 cm2. 
 
Then I ran into the problem of estimating the number of hairs in a square centimeter of dog skin.  
The interviewer suggested that I use 100 hairs.  I asked the interviewer whether I could assume 
that all dogs, regardless of age and race, have the same hair density.  He encouraged that to keep 
the problem simple. 
 
So, according to our assumptions, the newborn Chihuahua has a total of 10,350 hairs while the 
adult San Bernardo has 2.625 million hairs. 
 
Therefore, there are 2.625 million – 10,350 possibilities for the number of hairs in a dog, which I 
approximated to 2.61 million possibilities. 
 
Now it is time to find out the number of dogs in the world.  I let the interviewer know that I 
would exclude stray or organization owned (for security, etc) dogs from my analysis because I 
believe that most dogs live in households.  He let me go ahead with my assumption. 
 
I estimated the world population at 6 billion people.  I assumed the average household size to be 
5 people.  Thus, there are 1.2 billion households in the world.  I assumed that the percentage of 
households with dogs in the world was 30% and that the average number of dogs per household 
with dogs was 2.  Therefore, my calculation for the number of dogs in the world is 720 million. 
 
I now had the answers to the two parts in which the interviewer suggested that I divide the 
question but did not know what to do with them.  I asked the interviewer whether I could assume 
if the possibilities of hairs in a dog were evenly distributed.  The interviewer suggested that the 
probability was the same for any number of hairs. 
 
I therefore assumed that the number of dogs for each possibility of number of hairs was equal 
and divided the total number of dogs by the total number of hair possibilities. 
 
The result (720 million dogs in the world / 2.61 million hair possibilities) is 275 dogs per hair 
number possibility.  Therefore, I concluded that YES, there are two dogs with the same number 
of hair in the world.  But what if the question was “are there exactly two?” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
