===== PDF p70 =====
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
66 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy 
 
Your client is a book club, the type of club where you get 4 books free and are committed to 
buying 5 more books at retail price, which is usually less than at a bookstore.  Also, there is a 
book of the month you get unless you return the monthly card.  Their profits are going down.  
What do you do? 
 
Well, to address profitability I would look at revenues and expenses.  Under revenues we have 
price and quantity.  Have the prices changed that you pay for the books or the prices you charge 
to customers? 
 
!"No, both prices have remained stable. 
 
OK, then I would look at quantity sold.  I would imagine that this is the problem.  With all the 
competition in the industry, like Amazon.com, Barnes and Noble.com, traditional bookstores that 
have been expanding, adding coffee shops, etc, books on tape, libraries, etc.  I would say that 
overall demand for books hasn’t decreased, but that your demand has, is this correct? 
 
!"Yes, that is correct.  You are forgetting one competitor. 
 
Other clubs? 
 
!"No, actually I am thinking of another. 
 
I am not sure. 
 
!"Actually I am thinking of stores like Sam’s Club and Wal-Mart.  OK, what else would you 
look at? 
 
Well I would also look at expenses.  I would say there are four main costs: 
1. Actual cost of books 
2. Acquisition cost of customer 
3. Cost of keeping a customer 
4. Shipping Costs 
 
!"Good, except actually shipping costs are considered a revenue because they charge more to 
customers than they actually pay. 
 
OK, Well the other things are costs.  You have said that the price of the books has not changed.  
What about the acquisition costs? 
 
!"How do you think they acquire customers? 
 
Well, I joined a CD club similar to this and I often see ads for these types of clubs in magazines 
and newspapers.  Has the price for these ads increased? 
 
!"In a way, the actual price has not changed, but how do you think the prices may have 
changed? 
 


===== PDF p71 =====
Business Type Cases (full answers) 
 
Columbia Business School  
Management Consulting Association 
Guidebook 2002 
 
 
Please do not duplicate, copy, print or photocopy  
67 
If fewer people are responding to the ads, then in a sense the ads are more expensive. 
 
!"True, how would you calculate this? 
 
Well if the ad costs $10,000 and 10,000 people respond, then the acquisition cost is $1 per 
person.  If now only 5,000 people respond, then the acquisition cost has increased to $2.00 per 
person. 
 
!"Yes, and as a side note, how would you estimate the size of the book market in the US? 
 
There are 250 million people in the US.  Taking out infants and illiterates I would narrow that 
number to 200 million.  I would say on average each person buys 4 books per year.  That would 
be 800 million books at say, $20 a piece, for a grand total of 16 billion per year. 
 
!"OK, we are out of time. 
 
