===== PDF p52 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
48 
 
 
Difficulty: Medium 
Quant: Easy 
Company: LEK 
 
 
9.12 UK Premium Confectionary 
Manufacturer 
 
 
Question 1: What is the current profit / loss position of the 
manufacturer? 
You are provided with the following information: 
The plant sells 0.5m units of its specialty chocolate product per 
annum, and achieves an average price per unit of 50p. 
 
Further information will be provided if requested across the 
following areas of cost: 
 
Per unit costs: 
Raw materials: 24p 
Packaging and distribution: 3p 
Energy costs: 3p 
Labour costs: 5p 
 
Overhead costs: 
In total overhead costs amount to £100,000 per annum. No 
breakdown is provided (or needed for this question). 
Having identified the various categories of cost, the net profit can 
be simply derived as follows: 
Net profit = (volume x unit price) – (volume x variable cost) 
– fixed cost 
= (0.5m x £0.50) – (0.5m x £0.35) - £100,000 
= loss of £25,000 
 
Question 2: Can this current loss-making be rectified? 
This answer can be broken down into a consideration of each of 
the following areas in turn: 
1. Scope to increase the unit price of the product 
2. Scope to achieve reductions in the quantum of variable costs 
or fixed overheads 
3. Scope to increase volume sales, and hence reduce the per 
unit fixed cost 
 
1. Price increase 
[Interviewer provides the following information - the confectionary 
manufacturer is a relatively small player that has a distinctive 
niche in the chocolate market. It already achieves something 
of a premium for its product relative to the competition, and 
management strongly believes that any further premium would 
have a severely detrimental impact on its sales volumes.] 
 
2. Scope to achieve reductions in costs 
[Supplementary question – which areas of cost are most likely to 
offer scope for achieving reductions] 
This question is open-ended and looking to test commercial 
reasoning / judgement. Examples of points to make: 
• Starting with the variable costs, raw materials are a large 
element of the total cost, and would be worth looking at for that 
reason. However, it may not offer much scope for reduction 
since a number of the key inputs into chocolate (e.g. cocoa 
beans, sugar) are commodities. There may of course be some 
scope to achieve better terms for increased volumes, which 
we consider later. 
• Packaging and distribution is also likely to be a relatively 
commoditised area, although given the niche premium 
positioning of the product, it is possible that the packaging 
costs are high relative to the industry. This might therefore be 
an area worth exploring further. 
• Energy: The UK market is competitive and unlikely to offer 
scope for reduction, although the terms of current contract 
would need to be investigated. 
• Labour: Workforce is unlikely to be highly skilled in this sector, 
with minimum wage levels setting a potential floor on any 
scope for reductions. Level of unionisation could also be a 
consideration, but unlikely to be an issue for a small-scale 
manufacturer 
• Overhead costs – these costs are likely to relate to premise 
lease costs, depreciation of plant and machinery, and 
managerial labour overhead. Depending on utilisation of 
the premises, relocation to a cheaper location could be 
considered. Sales of plant and machinery could reduce the 
depreciation charge, but may not be feasible whilst maintaining 
a viable production facility. Overhead labour could also be 
examined further, but given the total quantum of overhead may 
not be significant. 
[Further guidance is provided that a working assumption should 
be made that costs cannot be reduced in any category] 
 
3. Scope to increase volume sales 
[Supplementary question - By how much would sales need to be 
increased in order to achieve break-even?] 
Break-even can be calculated using the following formula: 
Break-even sales   = 
Fixed costs / Gross profit 
= 
£100,000 / £0.15 
= 
666,667 units 
 
Given current unit sales of 0.5m, breakeven requires an increase 
of sales of 33%. 
 
[Supplementary question – what factors would you want to 
consider in assessing the potential for an increase in volumes] 
You have been hired by a small confectionary manufacturer that 
is in financial trouble. They are based in the UK, where they 
have a single manufacturing facility that serves the UK market. 
The company has consistently been operating at a loss for the 
last 5 years. 
They have asked you to investigate the reasons for this, and 
make recommendations to address the situation. 


===== PDF p53 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Firstly, the capacity of the company would need to be 
investigated. Guidance is provided that for the given cost 
structure of the facility, volumes could be increased to up to 
1m per annum, which exceeds the break-even level. 
• Secondly, demand conditions would need to be considered 
e.g. scope for increasing penetration of the current product 
into the market. [Guidance is provided that the product is 
relatively niche, and in its current form is unlikely to find much 
in the way of additional untapped demand to be exploited]. 
• White-labelling of the product could also be considered e.g. 
selling in volume to an up-market supermarket chain to be 
own-labelled [Guidance is provided that currently no retailer 
is prepared to offer terms to the manufacturer that allow it to 
realise its variable costs] 
• It might also be worth investigating whether other 
confectionary products could be produced utilising the 
existing asset base of the company e.g. alternative chocolate 
formulations, different-sized bars. 
[Supplementary question – the company has identified a potential 
new confectionary product that it could produce using existing 
machinery that would allow it to increase sales by 50% (assume 
the new product has the same unit price and cost structure as the 
current product). However, some re-tooling of the plant capacity 
would be required to provide the required production flexibility, and 
this would cost £150,000. Would you recommend that the 
company proceed with this additional investment?] 
 
The impact of the £150,000 investment can be evaluated as 
follows: 
 
Profit impact of retooling = incremental sales x gross profit 
= 0.5m x 50% = 250k x £0.15 
=  £37.5k per annum 
The investment therefore offers a 4 year pay-back. 
Whether the company should proceed with this investment 
depends on the company cost of capital. However, at this level of 
return, it is likely to be a sensible investment. 
