===== PDF p71 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
67 
 
 
Difficulty: Easy 
Quant: N/A 
Company: Oliver Wyman 
 
9.21 Amazon Prime 
 
Format: 
You  will present your response to this case question in front of   a 
panel of two Partners/Consultants for 30 minutes. You should 
expect to present your response for approximately 15 minutes, 
and the panelists will use the remaining time to ask any questions. 
A whiteboard will be available in the room and you may bring 
notes/exhibits with you. 
Case question: 
The Head of Strategy of Amazon (ecommerce retailer) wants to 
hire us to address the following issue: 
“It’s been almost a decade since we launched Amazon Prime in 
2005, a subscription service that provides free 2-day shipping to 
customers for an annual fee. The CEO wants to know 1) how 
profitable the program has been and 2) what changes should be 
made going forward to increase profitability.” 
The team asks you to take a first crack at the approach (NOT the 
answer). You have 30 minutes to prepare and then present to your 
fellow consultants 
Guidance: 
• 
You are expected to present an approach, not the answer – 
focus on how you would solve this problem if you had time and 
resources 
• 
Be structured 
─ Establish an objective – what are we really trying to solve? 
─ Define a method – What are the key areas that your approach 
would need to focus on in order to accomplish this objective? 
─ Prioritize – what are the important areas to focus on vs. the 
less important ones? 
• 
Be analytical – this case isn’t about doing math on the spot but 
it is imperative that you demonstrate fluency in analytical 
concepts. 
─ What analyses would you need to do to accomplish the 
objective and what information would you need? 
─ Use and talk through exhibits to help the panel understand 
your approach 
• 
Be creative 
• 
Please note, you are not permitted to use mobile phones or 
other electronic devices as part of your case preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answer Guidance for interviewers – not to be given to 
candidates 
• 
Candidates should frame the problem: 
─ The key questions are already stated as evaluating the 
profitability of the Amazon Prime program and finding ways to 
improve its profitability 
─ Determining profitability involves an assessment of the relative 
revenues and costs of having the program versus not 
─ Improving profitability involves identifying the drivers of 
profitability and understanding how to impact said drivers 
• 
Determining profitability can progress in various stages of 
sophistication 
─ Basic assessment identifies revenue from membership fees 
and sales and costs of shipping 
─ More sophisticated answers address net profit relationship 
between revenues from membership fees and additional sales 
from the free 2-day shipping offer that Amazon hopes generate 
enough profit to offset shipping costs, taking into account how 
Prime members will be skewed towards higher annual shipping 
costs 
─ The most sophisticated candidates would devise analysis to 
investigate the purchase behavior of Prime members and how 
they differ from non-Prime members to arrive at the net profitability 
of the program 
• 
Candidates should identify and clearly justify ways to impact 
the drivers of profitability, invoking concepts such as: 
─ Customer segmentation to divide customers into casual 
customers who occasionally buy one-off items from Amazon and 
habitual customers who regularly purchase everyday items from 
Amazon. This can be done via purchase volume, frequency, or 
purchase category (phone vs toilet paper). The idea is to identify 
ways to shift more customers from casual to habitual to improve 
overall profitability via targeted offers, new services, etc. 
─ Price optimization to determine the profit-maximizing annual 
membership fee by inferring customers’ utility functions based on 
which customers choose to enroll in Prime historically 
─ Competitive advantage, whereby Amazon invested heavily in 
its logistics infrastructure to support the Amazon Prime program 
by dramatically lowering the costs of offering free 2-day shipping 
via warehouse optimization and better inventory management 
• 
Candidates should clearly articulate at each step  what  results 
they would need to see in their analysis to support their 
conclusions 
• 
Direct candidates away from answers that refer to other 
Amazon services that distract from the case (e.g., Subscribe & 
Save, Amazon Student) 
