===== PDF p107 =====
Table of Contents 
 
103
Practice Case 45: Oil and Gas Rig   
(Mckinsey - Round 1) 
 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer:   
 
Your client is an oil and gas company. They own the rights to explore 
a offshore oil reserve in Venezuela. The oil reserve is good to exploit 
for 20 years. The production from a single cell will go up in the 
beginning, reach its peak, and then decline in its useful life. So in 
order to keep the production level stable, they need to drill new wells 
during the reserve exploration process. This makes their return on 
capital goes down. The client currently spend $100M per year on rig 
(every well needs a rig). They purchase rig from USA. USA has higher 
labor cost than Venezuela. So the client is thinking should they take 
this opportunity to build their own rigs use of the opportunity, and if 
it is proper to do, how should they utilize the opportunity? 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions 
 
• 
A Rig is a piece of very heavy equipment, weighing thousands of tons. 
Besides USA, currently there is no other place to purchase rig. 
• 
The market demand of rig is around $1000M annually, and USA rig 
manufactures are able to satisfy the needs. 
• 
Rig companies in USA are making a profit margin around 5%. 
• 
50% cost of rig manufacturing is labor related, including wages, benefits, 
and overhead. It takes US manufactures 1M man hour to produce one rig. 
Labor related costs in USA are $50 per hour. It includes three 
components: (1) wage: $25 per hour (2) benefit: $10 per hour (3) 
Overhead $15 per hour.  
• 
Labor related cost in Venezuela is (1) wage: $5 per hour (2) benefit: $2 
per hour (3) Overhead $13 per hour.  
• 
Initial investment required to manufacture in Venezuela is $50M 
• 
In order to evaluate how much it costs to manufacture rig locally, we 
asked three local companies to bid. They all come up with the same 
proposal, in which labor related cost is charged as $25 per hour. 
• 
Material costs are the same in both countries 
 
Key information to reveal when questioned: 
 
• 
The rig manufacturers will experience a learning curve.  In the first year, 
it takes 3M man hours, and in the second year it takes 2M man hours. 
After that, the learning curve goes flat at 1M man hours. 
 
 
 


===== PDF p108 =====
Table of Contents 
 
104
III. Sample Solution:   
 
I will look at how attractive the business of producing rig is. Then I will look 
capability to manufacture rig locally. Finally, I will look at how to purse the 
opportunity, if appropriate. 
 
First I will explore whether the low labor cost in Venezuela is a proper 
opportunity to pursue.  The ultimate standard is whether pursuing the 
opportunity will bring our client cost saving so that they improve their return 
on capital.   
 
Projected cash flows from producing rigs locally are: 
 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Ö 
Savings 
(50) 
(25) 
0 
25 
25 
Ö 
  
I want to do a NPV analysis. What is the cost of capital? 
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, letís just look at pay back. How many years are needed 
to pay the investment back? 
 
INTERVIEWEE: The minimum payback time is that the selling price still 
maintains at the current market price level, so the manufacturer harvest all 
labor related cost savings and pass none to their customers.  In this scenario 
the cost savings is the profit cash flow the company can achieve. (Notice US 
manufacturer profit margin is 0%). The payback time is 5 years. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Well, 5 years pay back sounds like a risky business to get 
into. Local companies may not have enough incentive to get into the 
business. How do you shorten the pay back time? 
 
INTERVIEWEE: (1) Since this will benefit local labor market, we can get 
government involved, ask them to provide fund or provide debt guarantee to 
lower the cost of borrowing. (2) Since we will benefit from the cost saving, 
we can sign long term contract, for example, 20 years with local supplier. (3) 
We can use our network in oil and gas business world and help them supply 
rig to other oil and gas companies. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Is there anything you can think of to accelerate the payback 
time by lowering labor cost? 
 
INTERVIEWEE: What we can do is to introduce expertise, such as senior 
engineers, project management, from USA manufactures. This will also 
accelerate their learning curve. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Anything else? (The interviewer pushed me hard on the cost 
issue) 


===== PDF p109 =====
Table of Contents 
 
105
INTERVIEWEE: Well, I can look more detailed into labor related cost. Since 
the cost we used in our estimation is from bidding. I want to get my own 
estimation to compare. As you said, labor related cost includes wages, 
benefits and overhead. I will go to labor market and look at the average 
wages and benefits. I assume overhead cost doesnít change compared to 
USA. I will look at the rig manufactures in USA to get their labor cost break 
down to get the figure. 
 
INTERVIEWER: The cost structure in USA is (hourly rate) 
Wages 
Benefits 
Overhead 
$25 
$10 
$15 
 
 The cost in Venezuela is 
Wages 
Benefits 
Overhead 
$5 
$2 
$13 
 
INTERVIEWEE: This adds up only $20, $5 bucks less than what local 
suppliers bid. 
 
INTERVIEWER: Why do you think it is less from bidding? 
 
INTERVIEWEE: Bidders may consider training cost and get expat from USA to 
build up competence, etc. They may also accelerate equipment depreciation 
since we only ask them to bid on one rig. This will make overhead cost 
higher. 
 
With this new labor cost, the savings manufactures can achieve will be: 
 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Ö 
Savings 
(50) 
(10) 
10 
30 
30 
Ö 
  
They only need less than four years to pay back. 
 
INTERVIEWER:  Good. We are running out of time. Why donít you wrap up? 
 
INTERVIEWEE:   
 
1) Our client should pursue the opportunity of low cost labor in Venezuela.  
This will help them achieve cost savings and improve return on capital. 
Besides, this will also help them achieve a better government relationship, 
which further helps them in their oil and gas business; 
 
2) Our client should help local suppliers to get into rig manufacture business. 
They can help them by signing a 20 year contract with local suppliers. They 
should work together with local government to seeks funds for local 
suppliers, and to organize some cooperation activity with USA to build up 
local competence 


===== PDF p110 =====
Table of Contents 
 
106
3) Rig is expensive and quality is important for this product. Local suppliers 
may be able to produce high quality rig. This is a risk factor to our client. Get 
good understanding of general manufacturing quality level in this country will 
allow our client make proper judgment. If quality is a concern, our client will 
want to form joint venture with local suppliers so that they can have more 
control on quality. Doing so will also help them further saving cost as well. 
 
 
