===== PDF p38 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
34 
 
 
Required 
no. of agents 
Seasonal 
pattern (%) 
Gross/net ratio 
(%) 
Capacity 
per agent 
Working hours 
per agent (sec) 
Number of calls 
per customer 
Call 
volume 
Number of 
diverted 
customers 
Working Time 
Duration (%) 
Average 
settlement time 
Call time 
(sec) 
Wrap-up time 
(sec) 
Difficulty: Easy 
Quant: Easy 
Company: BCG 
 
9.5 Call Center 
 
There is a company, let’s say a travel agency, that sets up a 
centralized call center where all incoming phone calls from all 
branches are diverted to. Shortly after setting up the call center, 
the travel agency is virtually unreachable because of the large 
amount of phone calls received. 
 
Before answering any questions, the candidate should check if he/ 
she completely understands the problem stated. The candidate 
can ask additional questions if the problem is not completely clear. 
 
The first question tests the candidate’s creativity and ability to 
come up with more than one idea, at the same time it tests the use 
of a structure, which helps coming up with more ideas. First, the 
candidate should think of main causes, and then specify these 
main causes in more detailed possibilities. 
 
Interviewer: What could cause the overload of the call center? 
Candidate: I believe there could be different types of reasons: 
Caused by supply 
Lack of call center agents (by sickness, by poor planning) 
Poor organization of the call center (unstructured call-diverting) 
 
Caused by technical difficulties 
Calls are not transferred to the centralized call center 
 
Caused by demand 
Peak in client demand (more calls than expected due to international 
affairs, high- season, bad weather…) 
 
I: Let us assume that the overload in the call center is not caused 
by technical problems or by peaks in demand, but is solely 
caused by the fact that the amount of required agents does not 
match the number of agents in the center. How would you 
calculate the required number of call center agents needed to 
fix the problem? 
 
For this question, it  is  important  to  set  up  a  good  structure to 
tackle it. Not a general structure, but one tailored to this specific 
situation. This is one of the main things the interviewer tests with 
this question: can the candidate set up a good structure, tailored 
to the problem. Furthermore, the interviewer tests if the candidate 
understands the problem and has some (business) judgment (e.g. 
in this case: a call center agent is not productive 8 hours per day). 
 
This answer first divides the required number of agents in volume 
of calls, average time spent on a call and capacity per agent. The 
next step would be to divide these three main parts into smaller 
parts. For the volume of calls, the first important driver   is the 
amount of diverted customers. Furthermore, customers can call 
up more than once; this is called the average number   of calls per 
customer. The third driver of the volume of calls is the 
seasonal pattern. The average time spent on a call is simply the 
duration of the call and the time needed by the agent to wrap up 
the call (e.g. enter information in a computer). 
 
FIGURE 1 (POSSIBLE ANSWER): 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
The capacity per agent starts of course with the working hours per 
agent, but an agent is not 100% productive. There are several ways 
to define the productivity, in this example the productivity  is split 
up in two parts. The first is gross versus net working hours due to 
lunch breaks etc. The second is “working time duration”, this is the 
percentage of the time the agent actually is busy with a phone call. 
An agent can be busier during prime time and less during other 
hours of the day. 
 
There is now a clear structure to show what drives the amount  of 
agents needed, and therewith a way to calculate the required 
amount of agents. 
 
I: How many agents are required in week 20? 
Most case interviews have some computation in them. To solve it, 
the candidate will have to figure out the numbers for all parts of the 
“driver-tree” to compute the required number of agents. There are 
several ways to figure out the numbers. First of all, an interviewer 
might give the candidate some data to start with, and he/she will 
have to pick out the numbers to use in the calculation. Secondly, 
the candidate can ask the interviewer for data, and thirdly the 
candidate can make assumptions using  common  sense. The 
candidate should always clearly state when he/she is making an 
assumption and how he/she comes up with it. 


===== PDF p39 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this case interview, the following data is given by the interviewer: 
 
CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS WHO ARE 
DIVERTED TO THE CENTRALIZED CALL CENTER 
Note: At the moment of set-up of the call center, the graph starts with 0. 
 
 
1.200.000 
 
1.000.000 
 
800.000 
 
600.000 
 
400.000 
 
200.000 
 
0 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Week 
From this graph, the candidate can deduct the cumulative number 
of   diverted  customers  in   week  20:  approximately 140.000 
customers. So in week 20, there are 140.000 clients “in the 
database of the call center”. To calculate the required number 
of agents, other data in the driver-tree is needed, and the 
candidate will have to figure it out. He/she can start off with asking 
the interviewer for data, but it’s always best to make assumptions 
and test these with the interviewer. For example: “I assume that 
on average, a client has contact with an agent of the call center 
twice per year, so the average number of calls per customer is 2”. 
And: “I wonder if there are many more calls in week 20 versus the 
other weeks of the year, for now I assume the seasonal pattern to  
be  0%”.  The  candidate  then  calculates  the  calls’  volume: 
140.000 / 52 * 2 + 0% = approximately 5.400 calls in week 20. 
 
To determine the average settlement time, the candidate can ask 
the interviewer for information. The interviewer may either tell the 
candidate to make an assumption, or give the numbers. In this 
case, these are given: “Monitoring talk- and wrap-up-time gave an 
average call time of 240 seconds and an average wrap-up-time of 
60 seconds per call”. This information gives the candidate the 
average settlement time: 240 + 60 seconds = 5 minutes = 1/12 hour. 
 
The last driver is the capacity per agent. The candidate can 
assume that the number of hours an agent works is 40 per week. 
To determine the gross/net ratio, the candidate could ask the 
interviewer, though he/she could also easily make an assumption 
on own experience: “I assume that of the 8 hours worked in a day, 
approximately 1.5 hour is lost to lunch and other breaks. This 
makes the gross/net ratio ~80% ((8-1.5)/8 = 81%). The last number 
to figure out is the working time duration, this is a hard number  to 
guess without knowledge of call centers, but the candidate could still 
give it a try. The candidate should then ask the interviewer    if the 
assumption is more or less right. From experience, the number is 
~50%. This gives the capacity of an agent per week: 
40 * 80% * 50% = 16 hours per week. 
Now,  the candidate has all numbers to calculate the amount     of 
agents needed in week 20. The candidate should not forget   to 
use the same units for all parts of the equation (all in seconds, 
hours, or weeks) and not make any unnecessary mistakes. In this 
case, the number of agents needed in week 20 is: 5.400 calls 
*1/12 hours per call / 16 hours per week = 28.1, so either 28 or 29 
agents are needed. 
 
I: There are no additional trained call center agents available. 
What other ways can you think of to help the travel agency with 
its telephone problem? 
It is stated that the amount of required agents does not match the 
number of agents in the center. However, since there are no 
additional trained call center agents available, the candidate has 
to find ways to decrease the amount of agents needed. 
 
This question will test if the candidate really grasps the problem 
and if he/she uses his/her structure in the right way. Looking again 
at the structure, the answer is clear: There are three levers to 
decrease the amount of agents needed: 
 
1. Reduce the call volume 
2. Reduce the average settlement time 
3. Increase the capacity per agent 
 
To determine specific solutions, the candidate needs creativity 
and understanding of the problem. 
 
On the first lever: 
• Stop diverting the calls from branches to call center 
(and divert back) 
• Insert a computer-based menu which answers the most 
frequently asked questions 
 
A possible solution to the second lever is: 
Reduce the wrap-up time by monitoring it, determine the most 
common wrap-up actions and shorten these actions where 
possible. For example introduction of a computer  application that 
helps the agents with the standard wrap-up actions such as 
“sending a brochure” 
 
For the third lever, a possible solution would be: 
Align planning of agents with actual demand for agents by 
mobilizing more agents during peaks in client demand and less 
during a low. This solution can be for example achieved by 
stimulating the agents to work part-time. 
Number of 
cusotmers 
