===== PDF p13 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
9 
 
Case 2: Chinese Cars 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm: Roland Berger 
Round: 2005 Summer, First 
Content: Market sizing, qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is a large Chinese conglomerate with a lot of cash on its hands.  They decided to 
invest this money in a plant that, by the end of this year, will have a full production capacity of 8 
million aluminum wheels annually.  Management assumes that it will be able to sell 20% of its 
production in the domestic Chinese market. 
 
The company hired Roland Berger to determine if it can sell the remaining 80% of its production 
to the US market, which is the largest vehicle market in the world. What do you think? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: 
This case is essentially asking you to do two things: 
1) Determine the size of the US car market so that you can understand the relative impact of the 
Chinese company’s goals. 
2) Assess the feasibility of entering the US market and provide suggestions on how this 
company might go about doing so. 
 
Market Sizing: Determine how many wheels your client could supply to the US market – both in 
number of wheels and number of cars (1/4 of the wheel number). Then ask about the size of the 
US new car market and the secondary market to determine what share the company would need 
to capture to sell 80% of its production in the US. 
 
Feasibility and Possible Actions: This is where you need to drill down to uncover automobile 
industry dynamics: 
• How do OEMs get the wheels for the cars they produce? 
• How would a Chinese company distribute its wheels to the US market? Directly or through 
intermediaries? 
• How entrenched are supplier relationships? Do OEMs buy based on price only, or do the 
relationships matter too? 
• What regulations are involved in supplying an OEM? 
 
Once you understand how the supplier-OEM relationships work, you can provide some 
suggestions on how this company might feasibly enter the US market. 
 
Key Facts: 


===== PDF p14 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
10 
 
• 17 million vehicles produced in the US each year.  70% equipped with aluminum wheels. 
• 10% of used car owners whose cars are less than 5 years old buy aluminum wheels 
• 85 million cars in the “after market,” 24 million of which are less than 5 years old 
• Most companies will select one supplier who will supply the aluminum wheels for the 
entire life-time of a car model.  Suppliers are usually selected 24 months before a new 
model goes into production and have stringent quality controls. 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewee: Okay. I’d like to first determine the production figures of the Chinese manufacturer 
and compare them to the size of the total US automobile market. This will help me understand 
the relative size of the Chinese company’s production numbers and whether their plan is 
realistic. Once I know how much market share the Chinese company wants to capture, I’d like to 
discuss the US automobile industry dynamics to determine if/how the Chinese company should 
enter the market. 
 
Let’s start with their production numbers. Let’s assume that cars require only 4 aluminum wheels 
and that spare tires are made out of some less expensive material.  This means that your client 
produces wheels for 2 million cars per year.  80% of 2 million gives us wheels for 1.6 million 
cars, which we are trying to sell in the US. So how big is the US new car market and how large is 
the secondary market (people who buy aluminum wheels for an older car)? 
 
Interviewer: About 17 million vehicles are produced in the US each year.  About 70% are 
equipped with aluminum wheels.  About 10% of used car owners whose cars are less than 5 
years old buy aluminum wheels. 
 
Interviewee: That means that roughly 12 million new cars each year are sold with aluminum 
wheels. Can we assume that there are about 280 million cars in the after-market, about 1 car per 
person, considering that people in New Jersey own on average 2 cars? 
 
Interviewer: No, that number is much lower.  There are about 85 million cars in the after 
market, but only about 24 million are less than 5 years old. 
 
Interviewee:  I see.  That means the after-market is about 2.4 million sets of aluminum wheels 
per year.  Considering that your client needs to sell 1.6 million sets, they’d have to capture a 66% 
market share, which seems very unlikely in such a fragmented market.  That means we should 
probably focus on the new car market. How do the major car companies procure the aluminum 
wheels they put on their cars? 
 
Interviewer: That’s a good question.  Most companies will select one supplier who will supply 
the aluminum wheels for the entire life-time of a car model.  Suppliers are usually selected 24 
months before a new model goes into production and have stringent quality controls. 
 
Interviewee: We probably would have to add another 12 months to even get on a company’s 
preferred supplier list, which increases the lead time to about 3 years before we can hope to 


===== PDF p15 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
11 
 
supply aluminum wheels to a major US car manufacturer.  Since you mentioned earlier that your 
client’s plant will be ready for production by the end of this year, this does not look like a viable 
option either.  What about trying to expand distribution on a broader basis than just the US? 
 
Interviewer: They thought about that as another option, but they would really like to work with 
just the US. 
 
Interviewee: Assuming that your client can produce quite a bit cheaper in China than most 
competitors can in the US, it might make sense to sub-contract some of this production capacity 
to suppliers of the major US car manufacturers.  This is probably less lucrative than selling 
directly to end-customers or car manufacturers because the client would have to share its profit 
margin with the supplier. That said, it would probably be the most efficient way to enter the US 
market on a large scale. 
 
Interviewer: Yes, this is exactly what they did. 
