===== PDF p70 =====
ICC Handbook 2020 
66 
 
 
Difficulty: Easy 
Quant: N/A 
Company: Oliver Wyman 
 
9.20 Best Buy 
Format: 
You  will present your response to this case question in front of   a 
panel of two Partners/Consultants for 30 minutes. You should 
expect to present your response for approximately 15 minutes, 
and the panelists will use the remaining time to ask any questions. 
A whiteboard will be available in the room and you may bring 
notes/exhibits with you. 
Case question: 
The CEO of Best Buy (consumer electronics retailer) calls you and 
shares the following situation: Our US retail store sales are 
declining because people are basically coming in, looking at 
products, and then going home and buying them online more 
cheaply elsewhere. I want to augment our revenue model by 
charging electronics manufacturers an annual showroom fee to 
carry their products in our store. I am meeting with Samsung in 2 
months to tell them this and I need help figuring out how much of 
a showroom fee I should ask for. What would your approach be to 
solving this problem for me over the next 2 months in advance of 
the meeting? 
Guidance: 
• 
You are expected to present an approach, not the answer – 
focus on how you would solve this problem if you had time and 
resources 
• 
Be structured 
─ Establish an objective – what are we really trying to solve? 
─ Define a method – What are the key areas that a project would 
need to focus on in order to accomplish this objective? 
─ Prioritize – what are the important areas to focus on vs. the 
less important ones? 
• 
Be analytical – this case isn’t about doing math on the spot but 
it is imperative that you demonstrate fluency in analytical 
concepts. 
─ What analyses would you need to do to accomplish the 
objective and what information would you need? 
─ Use and talk through exhibits to help the panel understand 
your approach 
• 
Be creative 
• 
Please note, you are not permitted to use mobile phones or 
other electronic devices as part of your case preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answer Guidance for interviewers – not to be given to 
candidates 
• 
Candidates should frame the basic problem: 
─ The basic objective is to generate revenue from doing 
something that Best Buy already does and doesn’t get paid for: 
serving as an electronics showroom 
─ The fundamental issue is that this is a one-sided value 
exchange that Best Buy is trying to make less one-sided – so 
we’re trying to identify a zone of potential agreement. There are 
two outcomes with different payoffs to the two parties: 
− Best Buy keeps carrying Samsung 
− Best Buy gets the showroom fee (+) AND whatever revenues 
they get from selling Samsung products (+) 
− Samsung pays the showroom fee (-) BUT keeps the revenues 
(+) that they generate 1) directly from their sales at Best Buy and 
2) sales that occur elsewhere but where the consumer’s decision 
was influenced by seeing the product at Best Buy 
− Best Buy stops carrying Samsung 
− Best Buy loses revenues from selling Samsung products (-) 
− Samsung loses revenues from Best Buy sales and other sales 
that benefitted from the Best Buy showroom (-) 
─ There are a few twists that influence these numbers 
− The showroom effect may not work equally for all products – 
perhaps consumers do want to touch and feel Samsung phones 
before buying but not DVD players (ie, they may be very content 
just to buy online). Therefore Samsung may not be willing to pay 
Best Buy anything for DVD players but they would for phones 
− Samsung would also care if Best Buy also carried competitors’ 
products – if Best Buy carried lots of near-substitutes, Samsung 
would pay less for the privilege of showrooming. If Best Buy locked 
out competitors, then Samsung would pay more for that. 
• 
The approach should try to size the magnitudes of the various 
(+) and (-) effects taking into account these twists 
