===== PDF p234 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
230 
 
62. You Drive Me Crazy (Other, TMT, Competitive Response, 
Balanced) 
 
Stem: Our client is a large international software technology provider. News has just surfaced that the US 
Congress is preparing to pass a bill that will take effect in 6 months and will legalize unmanned, self- 
driving cars and trucks, as long as the vehicles do not carry any passengers. Our client is one of two 
vendors that, within this window, will be poised to deliver the Simultaneous Localization and Mapping 
Technology (SLAM software) which is needed to operate any and all self-driving vehicles. Their only 
competitive vendor is a large international computer chip manufacturer. While there are many 
technologies that enable self-driving cars to work, we are only focused on the mapping and car 
intelligence software, again known as SLAM. SLAM software runs “in the cloud”, meaning that it runs on 
large servers connected to the internet and not on the vehicles themselves. 
 
The client has contacted us to propose the best go-to-market strategy for their SLAM technology. How 
would you approach this problem? 
 
(Note for questions: It is not important to know how the SLAM solution works; all the candidate needs to 
know is that it is a software program that runs on internet servers. All other technologies for self-driving 
cars, besides SLAM, are also expected to be ready for sale at the time of the legislation passing. The 
marginal cost to retrofit a vehicle to work with SLAM will be assumed to be negligible discounted over the 
life of the vehicle.) 
 
Candidate: Okay, I have broken the problem up into three areas: the customers, the competitor, and our 
client. First for the customers, there are many types of customers from small carrier and delivery 
companies, to large freight trucking companies. Each of those customers would have different needs, 
have different number of vehicles, and have different willingness to pay. Next, I would want to understand 
what their competitor, the large chip manufacturer is doing? What price are the selling the solution for? 
How many customers can they capture? What are their costs? And finally, I would want to know what our 
client’s options are for pricing and margins, and how that will affect units sold. To know that I would want 
to understand the fixed and variables costs associated with their solution. 
 
Interviewer: Great! To start, let’s think about the customers. Who do you think would be the potential 
customers for this solution right from the start? 
 
Candidate: Well since no people will be in these vehicles, I think the major customer segments are all in 
logistics: trucking companies, package companies like UPS, food delivery services, store drop-off 
services, mining and oil companies, and even some construction services like laying road could probably 
be automated. 
 
Interviewer: And what would you want to know about the customers to begin thinking about how to 
productize the SLAM technology? 
 
Candidate: Yes, I would like some information on the number of potential customers and how many 
vehicles each owns. 
 
Interviewer: Great, so our client has broken the customer groups into three segments, Large interstate 
freight, cross state mail and package delivery services, and last mile drop off services (e.g. delivery from 
a local warehouse to the end user – think Amazon Fresh!). 
 
Take a look at figure 1 and tell me what you think? 


===== PDF p235 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
231 
 
 
 
 
 
Candidate: Okay, we can see that the vast majority of companies have less than 10 cars in total, with a 
decreasing number of companies in each category as we observe increasing fleet sizes. We can also see 
that interstate companies have a larger proportion of bigger fleets in comparison with the other two. 
 
Next, I would like to know about what these customers are willing to pay? So, it would be good to 
understand these companies cost for drivers today. Something like the number of drivers, their working 
hours and their pay. 
 
Interviewer: Great! Take a look at figure 2 and tell me what you think. 
 
 
 
Candidate: As expected, the longer route interstate drivers demand higher wages as compared to the 
last mile drivers who drive less and work fewer hours on average. 
(Note: the candidate should begin calculating the cost per driver per year based on this data, if not, 
prompt them to do so) 


===== PDF p236 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
232 
 
Okay, to figure out the willingness to pay, I can calculate the total cost per employee by segment: 
 
 
Hours per 
week 
Hourly wages 
($) 
Weekly wages 
($) 
Weeks per 
year 
Annual wages 
($) 
Last mile 
30 
10 
300 
50 
15,000 
Cross state 
40 
15 
600 
50 
30,000 
Interstate 
50 
20 
1,000 
50 
50,000 
 
 
Interviewer: Great, now before you continue, I have some competitor information for you. Our client’s 
competitor, the only other company in the market with a SLAM solution is planning to sell their product to 
customers for $14.4 million each. Each product can support up to 500 vehicles. Industry experts expect 
that the hardware will have a shelf life of 4 years. 
 
Candidate: Got it, since it’s only going to be useful for 4 years, the annual cost is $3.6 million. Let me 
quickly figure out how many cars you would need to have to justify that expense. 
Last mile 
$3.6M/$15K = 240 
Cross state $3.6M/$30K = 120 
Interstate 
$3.6M/$50K = 72 
 
So right away we can see the majority of the market is priced out of being able to afford this hardware 
device. If only the largest players make this purchase, they should only expect to sell a few hundred units 
to the largest companies. So, this means that there should be a large market opportunity here. Do we 
know how much our client’s device costs to make? 
 
Interviewer: Yes, we do. Our client’s device costs $14 million to make, but can support up to 1,000 
vehicles. However, it’s also expected to be have a shelf life of 4 years but only if it’s run at 50% of its total 
vehicle capacity, and only a 1-year shelf life at 100% capacity. 
 
Candidate: Okay, so if they simply sell the device at cost they are not going to have much of an 
advantage. Can they sell the individual vehicle spots to companies instead of selling the actual device? 
 
(Note: for a hint, you can remind the candidate that our client is a software company and their competitor 
is a hardware vendor. So, it makes sense that our client would be able to sell a software license while the 
competition is only setup to sell hardware.) 
 
Interviewer: Yes absolutely! Since they are a software company and their competitor is a hardware 
vendor, they can sell support for each device as a yearly software license. That way they never sell the 
actual server, but instead run it from their datacenter. It would cost them about $1,000 per vehicle to 
support per year. 
 
Candidate: Great, so the cost to them would be 14M/1K = $14,000 plus the $1,000 for the setup cost for 
a total cost of $15,000. Given that the cost is not justified for the last mile market, I would not focus on 
them and instead price it for the cross state and interstate customers. If they priced it just below $30K we 
could expect them to have a very nice 50% margin and still be attractive to the entire cross state and 
interstate markets. 
Interviewer: Great! At that price model, the client would expect to sell 20,000 licenses in the Interstate 
and cross-state markets. 
 
Candidate: If they sell 20K licenses at $30K each, that’s over $600M in revenue, with $300M as profit! 
 
Interviewer: Okay, there are a lot of numbers to crunch to find the best price and the client is on his way 
here. We would like use to give them our current thoughts, what’s your recommendation. 


===== PDF p237 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
233 
 
Candidate: I would recommend that the client sell individual vehicle subscriptions for just under $30K 
each, giving them a margin of 50% and a potential market of over 20K licenses, or over $600M in 
revenue and 300M in profit. 
 
As a next step, I would like to run some more calculations to find the ideal price and vehicle load per 
device mix. Also, I would want to look into ways that they could price discriminate in order to extract more 
value from the different groups willingness to pay. 
