===== PDF p82 =====
 
Consulting Case Interview Question 
 
Case No.: STRAT10             
Firm:   Marakon 
Type of Case:  
Brain Teaser  (Why are manhole covers round?) 
Market Sizing  (How attractive is the market for fire trucks?) 
Operations  (Our client’s profits are down. Why?) 
Declining Profits  
Other 
Marketing 
Problems 
 
Strategy  (Should our client enter the beer brewing industry? If 
so, how?) 
New Product 
Introduction  
Competitive 
Response 
New Market 
Response to 
Changing Environ. 
Merger or 
Acquisition 
Other 
 
 
Initial Facts offered by interviewer:   
 
Recently, Bank One acquired First USA bank.  Bank 1 provides the full range of banking 
services whereas First USA only provided credit cards.  Bank 1 has determined that First 
USA will run their credit card department.   
 
The Question(s): 
You are on the integration team, what are your concerns? 
 
Suggested Solution 
 
Desired Framework:  [Check all that apply.] 
Cost-Revenue and 
Profitability  
The 4 P’s of Marketing 
The 3 C’s 
Value Chain Analysis 
Porter’s 5 Forces 
Microeconomic 
Analysis 
Internal-External 
Factors 
Other:__Cultural 
(OP)_______ 
 
Outline of Your Answer - Important questions asked, additional information divulged, 
assumptions, and logic:  [Walk us through how you arrived at your answer in detail.] 
 
I did not have a generic structure for this one, rather I listed the key issues I would be 
concerned with, and then dug into each one.  I started with some clarifying questions.  I 
discovered that Bank One had definitely decided to use First USA to run their credit card 
department; there would be no discussion about this. 
 
                                                                                                                                                        133 
Management Consulting Club  
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
 


===== PDF p83 =====
Cultural and Organizational Issues: 
Q:  “How alike are Bank One’s and First USA’s cultures and organizations?” 
A:  The first set of issues that I outlined was related to the organizations themselves.  This is 
basically the cultural lens that we all know and love from OP.  I explored the different cultures and 
found that there would be no major problems merging the two. 
Cost and Efficiency Issues: 
Q:  “Are there opportunities for costs savings with this acquisition?” 
A:  The next set of issues was cost related.  I wanted to maximize cost savings of merging the two 
credit card departments.  I explored what kind of cost savings could be attained: headcount 
reduction, shutting down duplicate facilities, increased scale. 
There are some scales efficiencies in credit card service, but both companies already had the critical 
mass to optimize this dimension.  First USA did have some more efficient processes that would 
ultimately drive down Bank One’s operating cost structure of servicing credit cards. 
Customers: 
Q:  “How alike are the fee structures of the two companies?” 
A: The next set of issues I addressed were the compatibility of the two credit cards and the specs 
and rates that each company provided for its own customers.  This is relevant in merging the two, 
because if the services and low rates provided by the two are not the same (which clearly, they would 
not be), then the least common denominator would be a factor here. 
The point is that if one set of customers is expecting no annual fee and a 12% APR then they will 
not accept anything worse than this, they would simply change cards.  Other attributes such as 
customer service would also have to be managed to please all of the customers.  The revenue effects 
of integrating the two would have to be analyzed. 
Wrap-up / Recommendations for client: 
In the end these three issues: organizational, cost savings, and merging fee structures and services of 
the two cards were the only ones that I had time to address. 
Desired Answer / Blinding Insights / Twists and Turns (if any): 
 
Additional information that might be useful to your fellow Sloanies:  
134 
 
 
 
Management Consulting Club 
 
2001-2002 Case Book and Interview Guide 
