===== PDF p110 =====
19. Retail Medical Products (Bain) 
Stem 
Our client is a retail health care equipment chain that specializes in three product lines. They rent 
Oxygen tanks. They rent and sell durable home medical equipment such as medical beds, wheel 
chairs, and other similar products. Lastly, they sell nebulizer, which is a medicine that is used 
for respiratory ailments. Over the last two years, the company has experienced a cumulative 
revenue decline of $40 million. A new CEO has asked that we identify the causes of the revenue 
decline and generate some possible solutions. 
1'' phase: Structuring the Problem 
Behind the scenes: The goal of the case is to evaluate revenue drivers .. The interviewee should 
ask about profitability goals, but once it is made clear that the case should focus on revenues, the 
interviewee should turn to the product lines. 
Interviewer: Where would you like to begin? 
Possible Answer: I would like to start by teaming more about the product lines and the trends 
that each has been experiencing. In any of the product lines, we could be expedencing declines 
in pricing or declines in quantity sold or both. First, I'd like to explore the Oxygen tank 
business. Do we know the price of the Oxygen tanks, and has it been constant? 
Interviewer: (as long as the interviewee has suggested a product line, move on, but get him or 
her to do Oxygen tanks first) Price for Oxygen tanks has been constant at about $2,000 per 
customer per year. Most of our customers are long term users and require the equipment for the 
entire year. 
Interviewee: So we must be experiencing a decline in the number of customers. Do we know 
how many customers we had and what the rate of decline has been? 
Interviewer: We started with I 00,000 customers, and we have seen a decline of2.5% per year. 
Possible Answers: Great. So, I would like to determine how much cumulative forgone revenue 
this represents to see if how much this has contributed to our overall revenue loss. [Should begin 
a chart or put together a well-stmctured equation] 


===== PDF p111 =====
Product 
P1icing 
Original# Original 
Rate of 
Year I 
1Year 2 
Total 
of 
Revenues Decline 
Revenues Revenue 
Revenue Loss 
Patients 
(Year 1 
(Quantity) (P * Q) 
(Otiginal 
Revenues (Original Rev 
Revenues *2.5%)s 
*2- Year 1 
*2.5%) 
Rev- Year2 
Rev) 
Oxygen 
$2000 
100,000 
$200 
2.5% 
$195 
$190 
$15MM 
Tanks 
MM 
MM 
MM 
znd phase: Second Product Evaluation 
Behind the scenes: The interviewee needs to recognize that this is only a portion of the overall 
decline and should keep progressing with the products. 
Interviewer: So, what does this $15 MM tell you? 
Possible Answers: This is roughly one third of the overall revenue decline. A similar decline 
across all product lines would account for the entire revenue loss. I would like to explore the 
nebulizer product line next. Some ofthe same customers who use the oxygen tanks may also use 
the nebulizer since they are both sold to individuals with respiratory illnesses. (bonus points for 
getting this last insight) 
Following the same process, do we know the price of the nebulizer, and has that price been 
constant? 
Interviewer: (if interviewee asks first about home medical equipment, steer him or her in 
direction of nebulizer by saying home medical price and quantity have been constant) Almost all 
of our customers are on Medicare. Last year, the government completed reevaluating its pricing 
structure. The result was a 25% price cut on nebulizer. 
Interviewee: That is a very dramatic price decrease. I would like to explore the impact of this 
move by the govermnent. Do we know the overall revenues from the nebulizer product line? 
Interviewer: They are about$ I 00 MM. 
Interviewee: So, if we assume the medicare price impact affects the entire customer base, then 
the impact of the price cut to us was a loss in revenues of$25 MM. Together with the $15 MM 
loss in oxygen tanks, we have dete1mined the causes of the $40 MM loss in revenues. Now we 
can turn to possible solutions to ameliorate this revenue decline. 
3rd phase: Brainstorming Ways to Boost Revenues 
Behind the scenes: This is the creative part of the case where the interviewee should generate 
revenue growth ideas. The conversation can go in a few directions, but make sure that the 
2008-2009 Case Book 
106 


===== PDF p112 =====
following points are touched upon: trying to change govenunent pricing on Nebulizer, sales 
force improvement for the Nebulizer, recovering lost oxygen tank customers. 
: 
Interviewer: Where would you start to remedy this problem? 
Possible Answers: The majority of the revenue decline has come from Nebulizer, so I will statt 
there. 
To increase revenues, we could raise prices. However, the govemment controls prices in this 
case. We could lobby the government and petition for price increases, but this will be a lengthy 
process and unlikely to yield immediate results. Therefore, I recommend that we find ways to 
increase the customer base for nebulizer sales. What is our sales process? 
Interviewer: Each store has its own sales force. They work with local hospital discharge staff. 
As patients leave the hospital, they are given the names of stores that sell the required equipment 
and medicines. 
Interviewee: One way to increase sales would be to increase the sales forces of each·store. We 
want to be sure that we have excellent relationships with all hospitals, and that all hospitals are 
promoting us as a source of medical supplies. With more sales staff, we could expand our 
geographic reach to new hospitals. We could also develop a delivery service or mail order 
service to expand the reach and convenience of our nebulizer product. 
Unless there are other options for the nebulizer, I'd like to think about recovering lost customers 
in Oxygen tanlcs. 
Interviewer: Sure, go ahead. 
Interviewee: I'd like to understand why we are losing customers. Are they choosing to use 
competitors? If so, I'd like to survey thel)1 to understand their motivations for leaving. Perh;tps 
we need to improve customer service or improve our product offetings. However, if patients are 
recovering or dying and no longer need equipment, then our problem is that we aren't acquiring 
enough new customers. In this case, we would need to look at new promotions strategies and 
advettising to attract more new customers into our stores. 
Interviewer: We don't know where they are going, but overall incidence of respiratory disease 
is on the rise. 
Interviewee: Then it sounds lilce we need to recover a larger share of the increasing market for 
these tallies. We should try to attract a larger share of this market in conjunction with our efforts 
to increase quantity of Nebulizers sold. 
Wrap-Up 
Interviewer: Can you tell me what you would recommend to the CEO? 
Possible Answer: $25 MM in sales decline is attributable to the govemment price cut on 
Nebulizer. In addition, we have lost $15 MM in sales dne to a loss of cnstomers renting Oxygen 
tallies. We should increase the size of the sales force to cover more hostpitals and drive more 
customers to our stores, to increase the quantity of both Nebulizer sales and Oxygen tank rentals. 
As a next step we would want to explore the costs of such a move to understand the profit 
implications. 
2008-2009 Case Book 
107 
