===== PDF p64 =====
1. Hungry Hospital (Deloitte) 
Stem 
Your client is Hungry Hospital. It has eight hundred beds and is located in a metropolitan area. 
It supports both in-patient and out-patient care. It accepts patients regardless of their ability to 
pay. Last year, it had revenues of $1.2 billion. Hungry Hospital is currently under budget 
pressures, but has received bond approval to restmcture its food services division. The division 
provides food for all of its patients. The hospital must decide whether to outsource or build the 
capability to provide those services. 
1'1 phase: opening 
Behind the scenes: The answer itself is not important in this case. Do not focus on the numbers; 
encourage the interviewee to not make calculations. The most important aspect is the stmcture 
and thought process that is set out in order to reach the answer. 
Interviewer: How would you stmcture your decision? 
Possible Answers: Compare the NPV, and/or break-even analysis between the two alternatives. 
Consider outside non-financial considerations like quality and any additional funding. Consider 
practicalities such as space, employees, etc. Here it is also fine for the interviewee to walk you 
through a structure. If you choose this option, ask the interviewee which metrics he/she wbuld 
use to make the decision. The candidate's answer should include the NPV method. 
znd ohase: Data Analysis 
Behind the scenes: Do not give all the data. Give extra data only when specifically asked for. 
Interviewer: How would you get the data necessaty to conduct your analysis? 
Possible Answers: There are a number of possibilities here. The most important aspect is that a 
bond measure was approved in order to support the project. That means that prior research on 
much of the data has already been conducted. Other considerations include market research and 
requesting quotes :fi·om vendors and contractors. 
Additional information could have been received by requesting information about nearby 
hospitals for comparison. The interviewer could reveal that nearby hospitals all outsource their 
patient meals. 
Interviewer: What do you think are the costs associated with each option? 
2008-2009 Case Book 
59 


===== PDF p65 =====
Possible Answers: 
Outsourcing: Costs per meal from a vendor; staff and management 
Building own capability: Up-front costs (fixed costs); yearly variable costs like ingredients, t/ 
labor, insurance, utilities, and space. 
3rd phase: Additional Considerations 
Behind the scenes: Allow the interviewee to brainstorm and justify as many possible 
considerations as possible. Challenge them when appropriate. 
Interviewer: What other considerations beyond cost-benefit analysis can be considered? 
Possible Answers: Considerations like quality, additional funding, public suppoti, quality 
comparisons with other hospitals, and synergies with existing operations should be considered. 
As in the previous phase, the interviewee could ask for additional information about nearby 
hospitals. In this case, the interviewer could reveal that nearby hospitals all outsource their 
patient meals. 
· 
Recommendation 
Behind the scenes: There isn't any right or wrong answer in this case. Just as long as the 
recommendation is confidently delivered and based on facts from the conversation, the 
interviewee should be fine. 
1¥1. 
we<..A-'!t> pwsw.. 
+z:..:)"" """ 6{\'!__ 
UM.uvt<.. ILW 
C:Auuf-5 
2008-2009 Case Book 
60 
