===== PDF p152 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
148 
 
32. Pest Control (BCG R2, Other, Profitability, Balanced) 
Stem: Our client is a major pest control company operating in the US South East. The client sells 
extermination services for the home and garden. The client is looking to improve their profitability, and is 
asking for specific recommendations to effect this. They do not have a target profit margin, but they are 
interested in exploring the full range of options presented to them. What areas should we consider? 
 
Candidate should lay out a structure that looks specifically at profitability for this business. The structure 
need not follow a specific format, it is more important that it be logical, MECE, and specific to this 
industry/client. It should address at a high level how we reduce costs and increase revenues (e.g. 
assessing product offerings, efficiency of territory coverage, customer acquisitions/marketing, etc.) 
 
It is important for this case to allow the candidate to brainstorm as much as possible. The goal is for them 
to be specific to the industry and to speak clearly and logically as to why their recommendations make 
sense. Ask them for the rationale behind their thinking frequently. 
 
Phase 1: Brainstorm 
 
Once the candidate has presented their structure, guide them towards a discussion on revenues, 
specifically pricing and customer acquisition/retention. Make sure that they hit on these in some way 
(they are analyzing P * Q but it should be done in an industry specific way). 
 
Interviewer: These all seem like reasonable options to consider, but as we look at our client’s revenues 
what aspects do you think are important for a pest control company? 
 
Candidate: The price that they charge for their different services, for instance the charge for a one-time 
fumigation vs. routine sprayings, as well as their customer acquisition and retention. 
 
Interviewer: Can you brainstorm some of the factors that would play into a customer’s decision of 
whether or not to buy our client’s services? 
 
Candidate should brainstorm ideas with a logical structure. Allow the candidate to exhaust their list and 
then prod for one / two more. 
 
Phase 2: Analysis 
 
Interviewer: It turns out the client has seen their customer acquisition stagnate over the last year, 
although the market for pest control is growing at a healthy rate, they are currently operating at 0% 
customer growth (i.e. not gaining nor losing clients). We have information on the effectiveness of their 
call-center, which we’ll assume covers all of their customer interactions. 
 
Present candidate with the figure below. 
 
Interviewer: On the left you’ll see how effective the client is at turning a prospective caller into a 
customer, and on the right we have the turnover of the customer base. How many clients are gained/lost 
from each? 
 
Candidate should double check the right side is an annual figure if they are uncertain. Ask that they 
round the annualized calls figure to 50K from 4,200 * 12 = 50,400 once they complete the calculation. 
 
Candidate: You had mentioned initially that we aren’t gaining or losing customers, so I’d expect that the 
net effect should be 0, and after doing the math I see we would gain 10k from call-in’s and lose 10k from 
our annual turnover. 


===== PDF p153 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
149 
 
Interviewer: Great, you had brainstormed pricing as one of the areas we should look into, can you 
calculate the average price that the client charges for their services? 
 
Candidate: Yes, I know from the figure that we have 500K accounts, but I’ll need the revenue of the 
company in order to calculate P. 
 
Interviewer: The company generates $50M in revenue. 
 
Candidate: In that case our average price would be $100 since $100 * 500K = $50M. 
 
Interviewer: That’s right, given all this information what could we hope to change? 
Phase 3: Additional Brainstorms 
Allow the candidate to list off ideas or brainstorm again. They should come to the conclusion that 
adjusting pricing would be difficult in this industry, and that 2% attrition is already rather low. Therefore, 
we should look to improve our 20% yield from calls. 
 
Candidate: I think that we should look to improve the yield of our calls from prospective customers. 
Interviewer: Yes this is an area that they can consider, how do you think they could improve their yield? 
Candidate brainstorms further – ensure it remains structured. 
Interviewer: The company has looked into the performance of their call center staff and found that 1/3 
have a 30% yield, 1/3 have a 20% yield, and 1/3 have a 10% yield. Based on this, what would you 
suggest the company do to improve their overall yield? 
 
Candidate brainstorms further, ideally on a new sheet to remain clear and not simply laundry list ideas. 
Should they ask, the employees within each bucket are indistinguishable from one another and it seems 
within the first week you can determine relatively quickly if an employee will be in the top bucket or the 
bottom bucket. 
 
Phase 4: Conclusion 
 
Once the candidate has concluded their list, end the case abruptly but in a friendly way. Do not accept a 
recommendation. The goal is that the candidate not get flustered, and remain engaged, potentially 
asking how the case ended or transitioning to the next talking point in a professional way. 
 
Interviewer: Great, these all seem like solid ideas and I appreciate your continued interest in our firm. 
We think you’re a great candidate and are really looking forward to potentially having you here this 
summer. 
 
Candidate: Thank you, I’ve really enjoyed our conversation, out of curiosity was this a case you worked 
on? I’d be interested to know how it turned out. 
 
Interviewer: Yes actually, this was the first case I ever worked on as a partner. We ended up 
implementing a training program where the top 1/3 coached new hires. We also turned over the bottom 
1/3 in order to have more high-quality customer interactions. 
