===== PDF p25 =====
 
22
C O N S U L T I N G  C A S E  I N T E R V I E W  
Central Power 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Level of Difficulty (Select level of difficulty) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p26 =====
 
23
Question 
Our client is a regional electricity monopoly.  Due to regulation, its market will be opened to 
competition next year on January 1.  There are no actual competitors at this time; however, 
the client would like ideas on actions to take in the short-term in order to better prepare for 
potential competitors.  They have no control over pricing and cost-cutting during this time 
period. 
Note 
This case is similar to a case that a student may receive in a second round interview with 
McKinsey, BCG, or ATK.  There isn’t much data- it’s an exercise in imagination tempered by 
convergent thinking.  It would be similar to a first round Monitor Group case if it had a surplus of 
data, rather than a deficit, requiring discrimination rather than imagination. 
Clarifying Questions and Answers 
Provide the following answers only if the interviewee asks the corresponding question. 
Question 
Answer 
1. Do we know of any potential 
competitors? 
None at this time.  Central Power is facing 
the threat of market entry. 
2. Do you have any information on 
pricing? 
Not really; pricing is controlled by a 
government, so it is beyond our control and 
will be the same for any competition. 
3. Are there other markets Central Power 
can enter? 
None at this time.  Our engagement is 
focused on their home market. 
4.  How is Central Power organized? 
Central Power has three divisions: 
1. Sales and General Administration 
2. Generation and Transmission 
3. Maintenance and Repair 
5. How many employees are in sales? 
About one for every 1000 customers.   
6. Does sales, customer service treat certain 
customer segments differently? 
No, they treat everyone equally. 
7. If there is a power outage, does 
Maintenance and Repair fix industrial 
clients first? 
No, they dispatch in the order of the call 
they receive. 
8. Has Central Power ever advertised or 
had a marketing campaign? 
Not in recent memory. 
9. Is Central Power undertaking any capital 
investment? 
Not in the next year. 
 


===== PDF p27 =====
 
24
Plan 
This case is about customer retention within the home market.  Since the client is a 
monopoly, market share is 100% and customer acquisition is irrelevant.   
The analysis may include, but is not limited to, the following areas: 
10. Barriers to Entry 
a. There is no actual competition to specifically target 
b. The government is deregulating, so there are no possible external barriers 
c. Internal barriers are possible, such as increasing switching costs and 
commercial attractiveness to customers  
11. Anticipation of Competitive Attack - Once the candidate sees the exhibit and realizes 
how attractive the industrial clients are, they can anticipate how a rational competitor 
would enter the market. 
12. Market Information 
a. Revenue 
b. Customer Segmentation 
13. Stakeholder Reaction - How will employees, unions, or local government leaders 
react to our changes?  (There is no set answer to this, just ask the candidate what 
they think and see if it is logical and structured.) 
Strong plans will anticipate the need to be competitive and draw on analogous companies or 
situations. 
Less experienced candidates gravitate towards issues of pricing and cost-cutting.  This is not 
a profitability case.  Weak candidates will often explore growth outside the home market, 
such as expansion into adjacent markets.  While interesting, this does not address the 
primary problem of what to do in the home market before deregulation.   Avoid these 
tangents.   
Steer the candidate to customer retention. 
 
The case has two main phases.  
Phase 1:  Qualitative reaction and quantitative analysis of revenue data 
Purpose:  
1. Test rapid understanding of a basic chart 
Most candidates ask about revenue very early.  Show them the attached exhibit and 
immediately ask, “What is your reaction to this data?”   Strong responses notice the 
differences between the customer segments.   
The “historical data” is irrelevant. If a candidate starts to ask about it or discuss trends, 
inform them that is a factor or population and government-determined prices, which are 
both beyond the control of the company. 


===== PDF p28 =====
 
25
   
2. Test basic arithmetic  
Test basic math by asking the candidate (if they haven’t already done so) to calculate the 
share of total revenue per segment and each segment’s revenue per customer.  If a 
candidate didn’t notice the differences between customer segments already, this is a 
second chance.  Note: I don’t have a problem if a candidate wants to round the total 
revenue to $250 MM from $258 MM to simplify the math… rough number are enough.   
  
Industrial  
Commercial  
Residential  
# of Customers  
150 
10,000 
100,000 
Revenue  
$150 MM  
$60 MM  
$48 MM  
Revenue per Customer 
$1,000,000  
$6,000  
$480  
Residential Customer Equivalents 
2083 
13 
1 
Fraction of Total Revenue 
150/258 = 58%  
60/258 = 23%  
48/258 = 19%  
 
NOTE: the math is really basic, but there are a lot of zeros that tend to trip up candidates.  
Most strong candidates write out the problem to avoid error, even if their math is facile.  
Now is a good time to diagnose how well the handle orders of magnitude.  If this is a 
problem, here are some suggestions for the candidate. 
Method A – Write out the numbers and cross out the zeros: 
ܴ̈́ ൌ
̈́͸Ͳܯܯ
ͳͲǡͲͲͲܿݑݏݐ݋݉݁ݎݏൌ
͸ͲǡͲͲͲǡͲͲͲ
ͳͲǡͲͲͲ
ൌ
͸ͲǡͲͲͲǡͲͲͲ
ͳͲǡͲͲͲ ൌ̈́͸ǡͲͲͲ݌݁ݎܿݑݏݐ݋݉݁ݎ  
 
Method B - Use exponents: 
ܴ̈́ ൌ
̈́͸Ͳܯܯ
ͳͲǡͲͲͲܿݑݏݐ݋݉݁ݎݏൌ͸ ൈͳͲ͹
ͳͲͶ
ൌ͸ ൈͳͲ͵ ൌ̈́͸ǡͲͲͲ݌݁ݎܿݑݏݐ݋݉݁ݎ 
 
3. See if candidate grasps key insight regarding higher value of industrial 
customers and uses it for convergent logic in Phase 2. 
By now, candidates should realize that losing a single industrial customer is similar to 
losing more than 2000 residential customers.  Churn of industrial and commercial 
customers is lower too and it is easier to approach a few hundred “B2B” customers than 
one-hundred thousand individual homeowners, apartment renters, etc. 
If a candidate still needs help, ask them, “Let’s turn the situation around.  Based on this 
data, if you were a competitor, which segment would you target?”  They should realize 
industrial customers.  If the candidate doesn’t verbalize that Central Power should target 
or defend the industrial customers, then ask, “OK, based on your insight about a 
potential competitor, what should Central Power do to pre-empt them?” 


===== PDF p29 =====
 
26
 
Phase 2:  Generation of ideas regarding customer retention improvements. 
Now that the candidate grasps that any action should be biased towards the smaller and 
higher value segments, it is time to generate actual ideas.  This part of the case is extremely 
unstructured- there are no more data sheets or obvious answers. 
Assume Central Power is decades behind the rest of the business world- they have no 
website, send out massive paper bills, treat customers with the finesse of a huge monopoly, 
etc. 
Purpose: 
Test candidate’s ability to generate their own ideas with structure and logic 
The prime differentiator between weak and strong candidates is their ability to have an 
exploratory conversation that exchanges ideas. 
Strong candidates will announce that they want to discover ways of improving customer 
attachment (or retention, stickiness, etc.) to Central Power and begin to explore the 
structure of the company looking for areas to improve.  They use a conversational style 
to ask questions.  They typically draw on personal experience as residential customers of 
electricity (or another utility).   
Also, they may ask about the organization of the company or use a “value chain 
concept” to structure their questions regarding the organization of the company.  At 
each part of the company, they ask questions about behavior, customer service, etc. to 
see if we focus on industrial clients.   Great candidates really have some out-of-the box 
ideas, such as energy savings, simplified billing, special websites, improved terms for 
accounts receivable, etc.   
You will know you have a strong candidate when they move methodically through the 
company and use their imagination.  Let them continue on as long as possible by asking, 
“What else?”   This is an opportunity to test a candidate’s ability to structure their 
reasoning and demonstrate conversation skills.   
For instance, they should be able to tactfully move the investigation to a new part of the 
company when they have exhausted their imagination.  These meta-skills are more 
important than specific ideas, so feel free to make up whatever you want about Central 
Power’s operations. 
Here are some ideas to facilitate customer retention by building a stronger relationship 
or making switching more difficult: 
a) Sales and General Administration 
i) Sign customer contracts 
ii) Increasing credit terms / days allowable for accounts receivable 
iii) Increasing the size of the sales force 
iv) Allocating sales staff to specific segments, since the value proposition is different 
v) Allocate special personal to high-value accounts 
vi) Reduce or simplify the billing process 


===== PDF p30 =====
 
27
vii) Create a website for customers to manage accounts online. 
b) Generation and Transmission 
i) Consider building substations or redundancy that improves reliability or quality 
for industrial clients. 
ii) Work with industrial clients to improve their energy efficiency 
c) Maintenance and Repair 
i) Fix outages by order of customer priority, not first-come, first serve.  (Besides, 
Industrial clients are more sensitive to power outages than residential customers) 
ii) Preposition repair equipment near clusters of industrial clients to reduce repair 
time. 
iii) Proactively visit clients to inspect their infrastructure or provide engineering 
advice 
Weaker candidates face typically fall in two groups: 
Group 1 – Lost in the Sauce: Some candidates have no idea how to systematically 
generate ideas.  Try and prompt them by asking about their own experience with a 
power company, or ask them to think of the value chain.  
Group 2 – Lone Rangers:  Other candidates will have a systematic approach, but will 
make assumptions and monopolize the conversation.  They declare, instead of explore, 
their way through this phase.  They will make up their own data and draw conclusions.  
For example, they might say, “Our client must be bad at customer service, so I would 
consider dedicating people to high-value clients.”   
A real conversation should flow like this: “Do we know how customers feel about 
service?”  Response: “They hate it.  The number one complaint is ‘every time I call, I 
speak to someone new’.”  Candidate: “Perhaps we should dedicate some sales staff to 
high-value clients that we want to retain the most.”  Response: “Good idea, what else?” 
There are two other meta-skills to evaluate: 
First, does the candidate explain their structure and line of reasoning?  It should be 
“transparent thinking”.  I use an analogy of a tour-guide.  A strong candidate tells me where 
we are going with their plan, takes me through it, keeps me from getting lost when we go 
outside the plan, and brings me back. 
Second, due to all the ideas being generated, a candidate needs good note-taking skills.  
Strong candidates will circle ideas on their plan or make a list in the corner of the page.  
When it is time to make a recommendation, they can quickly cover ideas at a glance.  Weak 
candidates will attempt to recall ideas off the top of their head, usually without total success. 
End the case when you are out of time or the candidate is out of steam.   
 
Recommendation 
The recommendation should include the following: 


===== PDF p31 =====
 
28
9. The answer – We have developed several ideas for improving customer retention; all 
priorities should be biased towards Industrial customers. 
10. Next steps – Analyzing costs, potential ROI, and effects on stakeholders for 
particular customer retention initiatives. 
Strong Recommendation 
“By investigating the operations of your company, we have developed 
several ideas for strengthening customer retention in the face of 
competition.  No matter which actions are undertaken, there should be a 
bias towards industrial customers who are more valuable as a group and on 
a per-customer basis.  If any of these actions seem attractive to 
management, we can undertake more detailed analysis to support 
prioritization.”    
 
Tepid Recommendation 
Many times, students will say the same thing as above but with too much detail, too much 
length, or without enough structure.  When they are done rambling, I ask them to say it 
again in 30-seconds or in three sentences. Sometimes it takes a few attempts, but it is more 
worthwhile then telling them later during feedback that their recommendation wasn’t good 
enough.  (Close only counts in horseshoes and hand-grenades.)  
Weak Recommendation 
Weak recommendations are missing a unifying aspect, such as customer 
retention.  They also fail to include the key insight regarding the 
preferential value of industrial customers.  Further, they may include 
something totally off-base, like cost-cutting or pricing. 
 
 
Questions to Further Challenge the Interviewee  
2. How do you think the employees (or another stakeholder) will feel about these 
changes? 
3. What do you think it will be like working for a client that lacks a history of customer 
service? 
 
 
 
 
C!
D!


===== PDF p32 =====
 
29
 
 
Exhibit – 1 
 
 
 
