===== PDF p37 =====
2005-2006 MICHIGAN CONSULTING CASE INTERVIEW PREPARATION GUIDE
- 39 -
© 2005 Michigan Consulting Club
Case 14: Retailer Discounting (I of II) 
A.T. Kearney, Round II
Our client is a retailer in New York State.  They have 120 
stores across the state and they are constantly 
competing with other retailers for customers. They are 
NOT a low-cost retailer in the state but on certain days 
they give out heavy discounts on their products to 
attract customers. They create brochures for weekly 
deep discounts and deliver them to their customers by 
inserting them in newspapers in the morning.  
The client’s competitors are also doing the same and the 
problem is that this scheme is not generating enough 
return on investment for our client as compared to 
competitors. How would you analyze the situation to see 
where the problem could be and how would you 
compare the execution strategy of offering these 
discounts of our client with that of their competitors?
• Only provide each piece of information after being 
asked for it specifically by the candidate 
• Campaigns are run on the same day as competitors
• Stores are as accessible (if not more so) than 
competitors
• Store product-mix is similar to competitors
• Our discounts are similar to those of our competitors 
(in price and product)
• We are using the same newspapers as our competitors
Problem statement narrative
Guidance for interviewer and 
information provided upon request
Establishing the 
Case
Establishing the 
Case


===== PDF p38 =====
2005-2006 MICHIGAN CONSULTING CASE INTERVIEW PREPARATION GUIDE
- 40 -
© 2005 Michigan Consulting Club
Case 14: Retailer Discounting (II of II) 
A.T. Kearney, Round II
Sample Solution 
Elements
Sample Solution 
Elements
Getting customers into stores
Servicing customers once inside store
• Service levels on sales days- are customer service representatives 
readily available?
• Is inventory adjusted in accordance with sale days?
• Back-end logistics: are prices updated in-store and in computer 
systems? (THIS WAS THE PRIMARY ISSUE- systems were not 
updated and customers were highly confused by discrepancy)
• Generating additional revenue from each customer on non-
discounted products?
Planning & Analysis
• Used electronic communication along supply chain to alert suppliers 
to anticipated dramatic demand shift for supply & restocking (at
appropriate levels)
• Use retro-active demand analysis to determine which sales are the 
most effective for gross revenue purposes
Bundling
• By discounting one product (such as hamburger meat) and selling 
buns, ketchup, mustard, relish, tablecloths, paper plates, etc at full 
price nearby would dramatically increase revenues
• The same could be true with salad dressing, dessert toppings, etc.  
• How do we figure out which items to put on sale, and which to feature in newspaper inserts?
• How do we sell non-discounted products to people entering the store purely for discounted items?
• How can we better manage our inventory around these sales periods without overstocking or stocking out?
Follow-up series of questions for candidate
• On what days are we running these discounts  compared to our 
competitors? Friday vs. Saturday?
• What newspapers are we using to deliver the brochures? Which is 
best for our customers: Times or Post?
• What is the layout of brochures compared to competitors?
• How accessible are the stores compared to our competitors?
