===== PDF p63 =====
Case #5: Ecosystems 
International
Industry: Nonprofit
Case Type: Human Capital
Quantitative Level: N/A
Qualitative Level: Medium
Quantitative level: Not applicable
Qualitative level: Medium


===== PDF p64 =====
Behavioral Questions
60
• What are your three greatest weaknesses?
• Please provide an example of a time where your moral and/or ethical standards were 
tested in a prior work experience. How did you handle the situation? What would you do 
differently in retrospect?
Question 1:
Question 2:


===== PDF p65 =====
Ecosystems International
61
Ecosystems International (EI) is a nonprofit organization that works to preserve endangered 
ecosystems throughout the world. The organization is comprised of a headquarters and 120 
local offices across the globe. Historically, headquarters has provided local offices with 
standardized curriculum and marketing materials, but each local office has operated 
independently with its own board of directors, operating processes and data management 
systems.  In recent years, EI headquarters has been working to change this, particularly in 
regards to data management. In order to better fundraise with corporate-level donors, EI 
headquarters wants to be able to see and report real time information on the organization’s 
volunteers and fundraising information. In order to accomplish this, EI recently mandated that 
local offices convert to a central CRM over the next five years. This mandate was met with 
great resistance from many EI local offices and since the beginning of the project, 
headquarters has been concerned about the success and reputation of the project. 
Using an internal team, EI piloted implementing the CRM system at six local offices. Each of 
these offices had different legacy data management systems and business process 
transformations that needed to be taken into consideration. After a year of piloting the 
system, the project has suffered considerable challenges. EI headquarters is receiving calls 
from local office leadership complaining that the system is cumbersome and employees are 
tremendously overworked trying to adjust to it. In addition, the implementation team is 
struggling because each local office data varies greatly, local office leadership is not 
engaging their staff to adapt to the new system, and there is considerable evidence that 
employees are not actually using the system. (see next slide)
Prompt:


===== PDF p66 =====
Ecosystems International
62
Overall, the local office pilots have not been successful and word is spreading throughout the 
entire organization that the CRM adoption is a colossal failure. EI has brought you in to 
advise them on next steps. In particular, the team would like help determining:
• Who are the stakeholders that need to be most considered in order to achieve success?
• What risks does EI face in this project?
• What approach should EI take to ensure that this project does not fail? How should it 
implement the software for the other 114 locations?
Human capital cases are conversational, but the candidate should take a few minutes to set 
up a framework for how they will approach EI’s adoption of the new system. Prior to setting 
up their framework, the candidate is permitted to ask a few questions. If solicited, the 
interviewer can provide additional information provided in the slides to follow. If the candidate 
asks a question for which the answer is not provided, just reply that the information is not 
available.
Interviewer Guidance:
Prompt con’t:


===== PDF p67 =====
Ecosystems International
63
• What is the organization’s structure?
– The organization is comprised of a headquarters and 120 locations, which are local 
offices of EI. Local offices vary greatly in their structure and size. They range from 1  -
100 employees and sometimes are flat but can also have multiple branches and 
hierarchies within one local office. No two local offices are structured the same. 
• What is the organization’s culture?
– Globally, EI tends to have a highly independent culture. Employees are resilient, if not 
slightly stubborn. Due to the highly independent nature of the local offices, many 
offices resist change initiated by headquarters and need extra encouragement in order 
to change their ways. 
– Local offices have the right to manage much of their business independently, each 
local office has elements of its own unique culture. Local offices can often operate in 
different languages and are composed of diverse sets of employees.
• Why is this change taking place? What are the main objectives of the change?
– HQ would like to have a better data management system to aid in its fundraising goals
– In addition, EI headquarters has not published that it also thinks changing to this CRM 
will improve operational efficiencies in the local offices.
• Is there a timeline for when the implementation needs to be complete?
– EI HQ was hoping to have all 120 local offices using the system in the next five years
Additional Information (if solicited)


===== PDF p68 =====
Ecosystems International
64
• Has EI ever done anything like this before? What was the result?
– Yes, EI attempted to switch to a different CRM system five years ago and failed to 
finalize the implementation because the software it chose could not handle the amount 
of data that EI wanted to store, which resulted in extremely long wait times to extract 
even the simplest pieces of data. After 2 years, headquarters decided to abandon the 
project. This failed implementation caused the 120 local offices to distrust 
headquarters and its ability to implement software systems. HQ lost a considerable 
amount of money in this endeavor and does not want to see this happen again. 
• What is the current skill set of the implementation team?
– The headquarters employees on the implementation team are well qualified to conduct 
software implementations, but they lack manpower due to budget constraints and there 
is not enough money to hire more members of the implementation team. 
• Who are the end users of the CRM?
– The end users will be the local office employees. It can be assumed that most local 
office employees do not have training in the CRM system, and those that do are young 
and not in high level positions in their organizations.
• Are there change champions for the project?
– EI has not yet established change champions, but this is a good consideration.
Additional Information (if solicited) 


===== PDF p69 =====
Ecosystems International
65
• What learnings did the implementation team take from the pilot phase?
– The data varies greatly from local office to local office: local offices are currently 
maintaining data in different systems such as Excel, Access, and other localized CRM 
systems. This makes it difficult to have a uniform approach in converting legacy data to 
the new CRM system, though as more local offices go onto the system HQ hopes to be 
able to leverage learnings from prior conversions.
– Leadership in some offices is serving as a detriment to the momentum of the 
implementation: Leaders at three of the six pilot sites have outwardly mentioned to 
HQ, their own employees and other office leadership their disdain for the new system. 
– Training has not been successful: For many local offices, there is a significant 
learning curve for employees to use the new system. The uniform training system that 
the implementation team delivered to all six pilot sites did not adjust for the fact that 
each office has different operational processes and priorities for which data they track. 
In addition, there seem to be bugs in the system as it simply does not seem to function 
as the trainings demonstrate. 
– It is uncertain whether employees are actually using the new system: After pulling 
data out of the system, it is clear that many employees are still using their old Excel or 
Access documents to track data and are not actively entering data into the new CRM.
Additional Information (if solicited)


===== PDF p70 =====
Ecosystems International
66
•
Leadership Alignment: survey leaders to see which will be allies to the project and start 
implementations in those offices; consider having positive leaders talk to other leaders 
who are not as enthusiastic; communicate with leaders how they will benefit from the 
system, what their role should be and how they will be awarded
•
Communications: determine what messaging need to go out to different stakeholders, 
when it needs to go out and who should deliver it; consider having most messaging in 
local offices come from local office leadership and cascade down from there; 
communicate benefits of the new software; manage expectations by communicating that 
there will be a learning curve and an initial loss of productivity during the transition
•
Incentives: come up with visible ways to award and recognize stakeholders that move 
the project forward (e.g., recognition to the office that have the highest level); celebrate 
milestones and achievements
•
Stakeholder Engagement: find change champions, who are positive and understand the 
business, to engage employees and listen for feedback on the implementation; consider 
that there are different languages and cultures in each office and a “one-size-fits-all” 
approach may not work
•
Training: revamp trainings so they address specific business needs of the local offices, 
which will take a thorough understanding of the current business processes and how they 
will change
Analysis and Recommendation 


===== PDF p71 =====
Evaluation Criteria
Candidate Level
Assessment
Average Candidate
•
Will answer each of the questions provided in the 
prompt
•
Will recognize that this change will impact all levels of 
the organization and will consider this in its 
recommendation
Good Candidate
•
Will use the learnings from the implementation pilot 
phase to shape the recommendation
•
Will touch on all of the major points mentioned in the 
recommendation slide
Excellent Candidate
•
Will continually draw recommendations back to the end 
goal and the business goals of headquarters
•
Will suggest methods for measuring success 
throughout the implementation and  potential 
contingency plans
•
Will elaborate on each of the major points mentioned in 
the recommendation slide and support them with 
background knowledge and experience
•
Will assess how the organization is doing in each of the 
major points on the recommendation slide as a current 
state and then suggest what the future state should 
look like
67
