===== PDF p23 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
19 
 
Case 5: Sugar Magnolia Hospital 
 
BACKGROUND 
Firm:        McKinsey & Company 
Round:     2005 Summer, First 
Content:   Qualitative and quantitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
Your client is the CEO of the Sugar Magnolia Hospital.  The hospital is a large hospital 
providing a full range of services, in a large, urban area.  In the last five years, the hospital’s 
profitability has decreased to the point that they are almost out of money and will not be able to 
meet their financial and social mission. 
 
The revenue scheme of the hospital’s different services falls into the following three categories: 
1) Fixed fee for service (e.g. broken leg = $150 to fix) 
2) Cost plus (cost of providing the product/service plus a percentage) 
3) Per diem fees (fee per day of hospital stay) 
 
The hospital gains patients through physician referral.  In other words, the physicians within the 
hospital see patients and after diagnosing those patients will refer the patients for care, treatment, 
surgery, testing, etc. to other places within the hospital. 
 
The CEO comes to you to ask the following: 
1) Why has profitability gone down? 
2) How should they turn it around? 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: 
This is a profitability problem, so plan to drill down on Revenues (price and quantity of patients 
or patients/ services at the hospital) and Costs (fixed and variable costs per patient.) 
 
Ask about the economics of the case: 
 
• How does the hospital make money?  (Paid in the revenues structures given by HMO, 
insurers, and state agencies above.  This is given upfront in the case description and is a 
bit of a red herring in the case.) 
• Who pays the costs?  (Again, the costs are paid by the HMOs, insurers, and state 
agencies) 
• How do patients come into the hospital? (Patients come in through referral from the 
doctors that work in the hospital or through emergency services.  This is helpful 
information to get in solving what is going on with revenues in the case.  When one 
segments the products/ services in the hospital, one should think about patient/ service 
segments, or patient/ doctor segments.) 


===== PDF p24 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
20 
 
 
After receiving this information, focus in on the following: 
• How many more people would you be able to see if you reduced patient stays on average 
by 1 day? 
• What would the effect on costs be for reducing patient/ days by one day on average?  
How would that affect profitability? 
 
Key facts: 
 
There are several patient/ service segments in the hospital.  The following are a few examples: 
 
1)  Women in Labor/ Giving Birth- Low profitability, High referral rates/ word of mouth, 
volume declining, fixed fee rate with high variability in length of stay 
 
2)  Pediatrics- Low profitability, high referral rates/ word of mouth, volume declining, fixed fee 
rates 
 
3)  Males (age 25-50)-Medium profitability, medium referral rates, volume stable, Per diem and 
cost+ rates 
 
4)  Elderly (65+)-High profitability, low referral rates, volume increasing, fixed fee rates 
 
Quantitative work in terms of cost: 
 
Fixed costs: $1000/ patient 
Variable costs: $500/ patient/ day 
Average length of patient stay: 10 days 
Patients seen per year: 1000 
 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
Interviewee: This is a profitability case, and profitability is composed of revenues and costs. In 
terms of which side of the hospital’s profitability I’d like to start with, unless costs have changed 
in some significant way because of a recent capital expenditure….? 
 
Interviewer: No, they’ve had no new costs. 
 
Interviewee: Right, then I’d like to start with revenues and see if there have been any recent 
changes on the revenue side. 
 
Interviewer: Sure, that sounds like a good place to start. 
 
Interviewee: So, revenues are composed of two things: price times quantity.  Have the prices 
that the hospital charges for services that it provides changed recently? 
 


===== PDF p25 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
21 
 
Interviewer: No, prices haven’t increased or decreased in any considerable way—other than 
general increases along with inflation. 
 
Interviewee: Okay, so, it’s a problem with the number of patients, or number of patient/ 
services, along different segments then. 
 
Interviewer: Yes, you’re right.  What do you hypothesize is happening? 
 
Interviewee: I imagine that there are several patient, or patient/ service, segments within the 
hospital. 
 
Interviewer: That’s right. 
 
Interviewee: Is the hospital a full-service provider, or do they specialize in some sort of area, or 
service? 
 
Interviewer: Nope, the hospital is a full-service provider. 
 
Interviewee: So, I hypothesize that more profitable and/ or higher revenue generating patient/ 
service segments are decreasing. 
 
Interviewer: Interesting.  There are 4 principal segments: 
 
1)  Women in Labor/ Giving Birth- Low profitability, High referral rates/ word of mouth, volume 
declining, fixed fee rate with high variability in length of stay 
 
2)  Pediatrics- Low profitability, high referral rates/ word of mouth, volume declining, fixed fee 
rates 
 
3)  Males (age 25-50)-Medium profitability, medium referral rates, volume stable, Per diem and 
cost+ rates 
 
4)  Elderly (65+)-High profitability, low referral rates, volume increasing, fixed fee rates 
 
What do you think this data tells you? 
 
Interviewee: Well, first, I would prioritize the segments in terms of how important they seem to 
our current inquiry: I would put the third segment aside because the volume has stayed stable, 
and I would concentrate on the first two segments for two reasons: 1) Their volume has been 
declining, and 2) These segments reflect high word of mouth and long-term patient segments that 
are likely to keep coming back to the hospital for other services for a long time if they like the 
service that they get there (as opposed to the elderly segment, which represents a diminishing 
group of patient/ services because of their age). 
 


===== PDF p26 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
22 
 
Interviewer: Good, good.  And what would you want to do in order to reverse the decline of 
those segments? 
 
Interviewee: I would probably want to do some research into why those segments’ volume is 
declining.  Has service quality declined?  Have the number or quality of pediatricians or 
obstetricians at the hospital declined? Has another hospital in the area begun to specialize in 
pediatrics and obstetrics that is making this patient and patient/service volume decrease in these 
specialties? 
 
Interviewer: Good, good.  One last question: would you abandon the fourth segment (elderly) 
patients completely.  They are a highly profitable segment.  How would you deal with them? 
 
Interviewee: They are a highly profitable segment, which is a bit strange, as they have a fixed 
fee rate revenue structure and their length of stay can vary tremendously.  I would try to segment 
them further into patient/ service segments that were a little more predictable along the 
dimension of how long they stay—this might yield a much more profitable and predictable 
patient/ service type than what they currently have. 
 
Interviewer: Right, so there might be some 20% of those patients that are staying longer and 
driving down profitability for the rest? 
 
Interviewee: Yes, and a more detailed segmentation might show that.  So they’d be able to 
target and get the more profitable of those patients. 
 
Interviewer: Good, good.  So, that pretty much covers the revenues side.  Now, suppose that I 
told you that you told you that we went to the CEO with all of this interesting info  about 
revenues and revenue generation by targeting different segments, but the CEO said that they 
really thought it was about the number of patients that the hospital can see and the costs and 
cost controls.  How would you think about costs? 
 
Interviewee: Well, there are two components to costs: fixed costs and variable costs.  Do we 
know fixed costs and variable costs by patient, or by patient/ service type? 
 
Interviewer:  Well, actually, we don’t have cost data by patient or by patient/ service type, like 
we did in the revenues discussion.  But we do have cost data per patient on average at the 
hospital. 
 
Interviewee: So, aggregate data on a per patient level? 
 
Interviewer: Yes.  We know that on average the fixed cost for admitting a patient is $1000.  And 
the cost per patient day is $500.  The average length of a patient’s stay is 10 days.  And the 
hospital sees 1000 patients each year.  The CEO is curious about how many more patients the 
hospital could see if they reduced the length of an average patient day by one day. 
 


===== PDF p27 =====
 
Columbia Business School 
Case Book 2005 
 
23 
 
Interviewee: Well, currently they are seeing 1000 patients annually.  Each patient stays 10 days 
on average; so, the hospital has the capacity for 10,000 patient days annually (1000 patientsX 10 
days= 10,000 patient days).  If you reduced the stay to 9 days on average for each patient, then 
there would be an excess of 1000 patient-days of capacity (10,000 patient-days minus 9000 
patient-days).  If each patient stays 9 days on average, then the hospital could see about 111 
more patients each year (1000 excess patient-days/ 9 days= 111 patients). 
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  Now, how much would costs decrease if they did this? 
 
Interviewee: Well, currently, they see 1000 patients per year for an average of 10 days each.  
Fixed costs for these patients are $1000 X 1000 patients, which equals $1,000,000.  Variable 
costs are 10,000 patient days X $500/ day, which equals $5,000,000.  So, their current costs are 
$6,000,000. 
 
If they reduced the average patient stay by 1 day, then their variable costs change.  They still 
have the same fixed costs of $1,000,000.  But their variable costs have changed: they now have 
9,000 patient days X $500/ day, which equals $4,500,000 in variable costs.  That’s a cost savings 
of $500,000 each year.  
 
Interviewer:  That’s right.  So, how would you summarize these findings to the CEO and what 
recommendations would you make? 
 
Interviewee: On the revenues side, Sugar Magnolia is losing patients in a few segments that 
provide revenues long-term.  For these segments, they need to target and bring in more doctors 
who “own” these patients and improve their brand in these service areas through promotions, 
thought leader excellence, or community activities that would raise their profile.  And they 
should further segment other patient/ service types (the elderly) in order to realize more 
profitable patient/ service types within current segments.   
 
On the costs side, the hospital could realize significant decreases in variable costs by trimming 
down patient days, by even a slight amount on a per patient basis.  While this is where the 
numbers and quantitative analysis is more telling, Sugar Magnolia has a social mission to be 
concerned with, as well as the financial mission that we’ve already discussed at length.  Because 
the hospital needs to provide the best service and healthcare to its patients, it may not be able to 
cut down on patient/ days per patient (the costs side) while maintaining its social goal/ mission.  
And for this reason, several quality of care analyses should be done before initiating some of the 
cost-cutting initiatives that have been discussed here. 
