===== PDF p167 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
163 
 
39. Premium Paint (L.E.K. R1, Retail, New Market, Quantitative) 
Interviewer: Our client is a premium paint manufacturer based in the UK. They have an established 
brand and stable market share in the UK, but are interested in pursuing other markets. Although they 
currently do not have a presence in the US, they are interested in entering the market and have hired us 
to help. Specifically, the client has hired us to size the market opportunity for the residential interior paint 
market in the US as part of their overall decision to enter the market. 
 
Note: if asked, the paint market is broadly divided into premium and value. Premium paint is typically ~4x 
as expensive and typically comes in curated colors. Residential includes places where people live 
(houses, apartments, etc.) and excludes commercial properties. Interior paint covers all locations inside a 
house and is less resistant to wear from weather. 
 
Candidate: This is a market sizing question, so I’d like to structure my thoughts using the following 
structure. I’ll then make some assumptions and we can work through the numbers to get the total size of 
the US residential interior paint market. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: an candidate should lay out the approach and explain the reasoning. Then, reasonable 
assumptions should be made to get to the final market size. Alternative structures could include second 
or third homes, segment the market by apartments vs. houses, segment the market by rural vs. urban, 
etc. 
 
Candidate: Painting a house happens either when you repaint a room or when you build a new house. I 
will make some assumptions to get to the US residential interior paint market. Starting with population, 
there are about 330 million people in the US. With a household size of 3 people per house, that gives 
us 110 million households. 
 
Repainting a room happens every few years. I’ll assume that on average, homeowners repaint every five 
years, which means in any given year, 20% of households are repainting. That means that 22 million 
households are repainted each year (110million x 20%). A typical house has a kitchen, living room, 
dining room, three bedrooms, plus 3 bathrooms that I will count as one full room for a total of seven 
rooms per house. It seems like a room might need two gallons of paint per room, so that would be 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PDF p168 =====
Casebook | 2019-20 Edition 
164 
 
gallons per household. Multiplying that by the number of households, that gives 308 million gallons of 
residential interior paint for renovations. 
 
New construction replaces some old housing and also accommodates the growing population. Assuming 
that new housing adds an extra 2% of housing to the market, that gives 2.2 million households. 
Multiplying by the same 14 gallons per household we found earlier, that gives 30.8 million gallons of 
residential interior paint for renovations. 
 
Interviewer: Ok, great. As you may know, the new housing market is very cyclical. Some years it can be 
more than 10% per year and others it can be near zero. Given that information, how cyclical do you 
expect the paint market to be? 
 
Candidate: Since most of the market - >90% in these calculations – is made up of the renovation portion 
of the market, I would expect paint to be somewhat insulated from swings in new housing construction 
when compared with other building products like lumber. However, if the new housing market downturn 
happens at the same time as a general recession, homeowners may be less likely to splurge on 
repainting. 
 
Interviewer: How should the client think about entering the US market? 
 
Candidate: You can enter a new market organically or inorganically. On the organic side, the client 
could use existing capacity in the UK and ship material to the US market. This would have a low capital 
cost and allow the client to control quality, but potentially risk shipping heavy chemicals across the US 
and potentially have regulation issues. Inorganically, the client could either acquire or do a joint venture. 
An acquisition target would need to fit with the brand or be able to meet the quality standards our client 
demands, but would already have access to distribution channels and some brand recognition. A joint 
venture seems unlikely because our client does not have any assets in the US to contribute to the new 
entity. Given these, I’d like to explore entering the market organically more and see if we have the 
capacity or cost structure to allow this. 
 
Interviewer: Can you give a quick summary of what we know so far and where you’d like to evaluate 
next? 
 
Candidate: Sure. We’ve looked at the size of the US residential interior paint market as part of a market 
entry evaluation for our client, a UK based paint manufacturer. The market is about 340 million gallons of 
paint per year, more than 90% of which is used in remodels and renovations, which could reduce volatility 
in the market despite a housing market prone to swings. Pursuing an organic market entry might make 
sense as we can control the quality and product better, but a key area of concern is distribution and 
customer awareness. I’d also like to explore the marketing strategy – how we might actually get 
consumers to buy this premium product and who to target (such as interior designers and luxury 
homeowners). 
