===== PDF p20 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 17 
 
Case 7: Rainbow Chemicals 
Company: Deloitte Consulting (Strategy and Operations) 
 
Rainbow Chemicals recently emerged from Bankruptcy. They hired you as a consultant to help them 
chart a future course of action. And first they want you to evaluate if the current products are viable. 
How would you go about this? 
 
Instruction to Interviewer: The case tests how a candidate thinks about the fundamentals of turning 
a company around. For this the candidate has to understand the current situation first. 
 
Suggested structure: Overall the candidate should explore if the client can generate positive cash 
flow in the future. If not the candidate should look at options to generate cash flow.  
Step 1: Understand what led to bankruptcy 
Step 2: Understand the products and industry 
Step 3: Understand the current product economics and future projections 
Step 4: Propose recommendations – Both for top line and bottom line improvement 
 
What led to bankruptcy? Simple the company was not making money and was incurring losses. This 
led to default of loans and resulted in Bankruptcy. They refinanced the company through some 
means and have very limited funding. Additional funding is not possible. 
 
Products and Industry:  
- 
Their main product is Chemical X and the by-product is Chemical Y. 
- 
Both products X & Y are commodities 
- 
The chemical industry is highly cyclical and now it is at its peak  
- 
The industry is highly competitive. 
- 
Customers are large chemical companies 
 
Product economics: Data to be given only when the candidate asks 
Annual production capacity: Totally 500,000 tons 
Price of Chemical X = $95 per ton 
Price of Chemical Y = $75 per ton 
The end product from the manufacturing process is a combination of X & Y. It has to be separated 
into X & Y. Each ton of the end product they produce has X & Y in the ratio 1 : 1.5 
The candidate has to perform the following calculations 
 
Annual production volume in tons 
500000
X in tons 
200000
Y in tons 
300000
Price of X Per ton 
95
Price of Y Per ton 
75
Fixed Cost in $ 
25000000
Variable cost per ton (X&Y) 
60
Annual Revenue 
41500000
Total annual cost 
55000000
Net Annual Profit 
(13500000)


===== PDF p21 =====
Do not reproduce, store or distribute without written permission from the Graduate Consulting Group at McCombs School of Business Page 18 
 
Instructions to the Interviewer: It is clear that the current products are making losses. Provide the 
following response for questions that may arise 
- 
Can we raise prices? – No we cannot. Industry is very competitive and also is at the peak of its 
cyclical. This means that going forward that the price will only go down 
- 
Can we exit the business? – It is a possibility. But push the candidate to look at ideas to turn 
the company around 
 
Question: How can we increase the top line?  
Assume that both chemical X & Y have a saturated market and the market has several competitors. 
With the cyclical demand and a downward trend expected in the future it is difficult to sell more. So 
the candidate has to look for opportunities to launch new products or services 
 
Question: What new products or services can the company launch? 
Allow the candidate to explore options creatively. However funding to invest is very limited. Some 
suggestions 
- 
Products that can be manufactured without major modifications to existing plant set up. And 
look for products that will hedge against cyclical business issues. 
- 
Products that can be bought from manufacturers outside the US but can be sold in US 
- 
Start a chemical distribution company 
- 
Start a chemical research laboratory and provide R&D advice to other companies 
- 
Ex: if the chemical is used in the coolant systems of machines then the customers would like if 
the manufacturer administers the chemical into the system on a routine basis. The client can 
look at any such opportunities 
- 
Move into retailing chemicals 
 
Question: It is obvious that the cost of production is higher than the price they can command. What 
are the areas they should look at? Some suggestions 
- 
Improve plant efficiency 
- 
Reduce raw material cost by changing suppliers or negotiating costs down 
- 
Reduce the fixed costs like corporate workforce and so on 
- 
Outsource manufacturing to low cost countries 
- 
Reduce energy costs by improving the energy efficiency 
 
Question: Why can the client not exit the business? Sell this business to some one and start 
something that is profitable? What issues do you foresee if you have to do so? 
- 
Who will buy this business? 
- 
How much can we sell this for? 
- 
Issues with laying off several people 
 
Instructions to the Interviewer: Ask for final recommendations.  
 
 
 
 
 
