===== PDF p32 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 28 - 
Case 6: Busy Internet 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Firm: Good Morning Africa 
Round: 2008 Summer Internship, First  
Content: Qualitative 
 
CASE QUESTION 
 
Our client is Busy Internet, the largest Internet Cafè in Ghana. 
 
Busy Internet also offers: 
 a business incubator service 
 ISP, Internet Service Provider (Broadband, dial-up, satellite, and radio 
connection) 
 Copy Center 
 Conference Room 
 Office renting 
 
Busy Internet is experiencing a decline in profit and it has hired GMA to asses the 
problems, give recommendations and assist them trough the implementation process. 
 
 
INTERVIEWER BRIEFING 
 
Recommended approach: The purpose of this case is to asses the candidates’ analysis 
skills and his abilities of gathering information through appropriate questions. A good 
understanding of the Ghanaian business climate is important but not a must. A good 
structure to answering the case is necessary. The interviewee should suggest a possible 
framework and a solution but he/she should have a clue about the major problems of 
implementing changes in a non-traditional business environment. 
 
Gathering information in Ghana is extremely difficult, and managers tend to flood 
consultants with information. Therefore a good structure, the ability to prioritize and 
navigate trough useless or cloudy/ambiguous information is important. For these reasons, 
the interviewer can give upfront useless information and hide the important ones.  
 
Since Ghana best practices are still to be polished, it is important that the interviewee 
display a certain degree of flexibility and adaptability while asking questions. The use of 
inflated and difficult terms should also be avoided.  


===== PDF p33 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 29 - 
EXAMPLE DIALOGUE 
 
Interviewer: So how would you analyze this case? 
 
Interviewee:  It really looks like an interesting and complex case. May I have a second to 
structure my analysis? 
 
Interviewer: Sure 
 
Interviewee:  Ok, so these are the base steps of my structure. 
 
1. First I want to know more about the products, it looks like Busy has a very 
diverse product mix. So I want to know more about the service Busy is selling to 
his client, they can have different profit margins. 
 
2. Since profit is Revenues – Costs, I want to analyze these 2 elements separately. 
 
3. Finally I want to analyze the market’s trend for each of these products.  
 
Interviewer: Sounds great, let’s start with the product mix. Busy sells a big variety of 
different services to its clients, but we can group the major sources of revenues in 3 
different products: 
 Copy center 
 Cyber Café 
 ISP 
 
Interviewee:  Ok, let’s analyze these 3 divisions separately 
 
Interviewer: Ok. What’s next? 
 
Interviewee:  What we do know about the costs for these 3 divisions? Have they 
increased lately? 
 
Interviewer: Ghana experiences black outs, and in order to maintain the service Busy 
must use a very expensive power Ggnerator. Apart from that, the 3 product lines have not 
experienced any increase in cost 
 
Interviewee:  What we do know about the revenues for these 3 divisions? 
 
Interviewer: The copy center is experiencing a decrease in revenues; the same can be 
said for the cyber café while the ISP is slowly growing. 
 


===== PDF p34 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 30 - 
Interviewee:  That is interesting. Do we know any information about the global markets 
for all these products? Are these markets growing in Ghana? Are they fragmented?  
 
Interviewer: Ok, here is some information: 
 Copy center: it’s a growing market, many new small players are entering the 
market making lots of  money 
 Cyber Café: internet cafés are not doing very well in Ghana. Many cafés are 
closing as more Ghanaians are enjoying connection at home 
 ISP:  it’s a growing market, technology is improving and it is now possible to 
reach many customers via radio 
 
Interviewee:  Thank you. What do we know about the competitors? 
 
Interviewer: Good question. There are new entrants in the Cybercafé market, a new 
Internet Café which is stealing clients from Busy Internet Café. Competitors in the ISP 
are minor players with the addition of Ghana Telecom, the government sponsored 
Internet Service Provider. 
 
Interviewee:  What is our value proposition to our customers? Similarly, how is the 
competition targeting our customers? 
 
Interviewer: Busy Internet customers are elite customers, prices at Busy are very 
expensive (the highest in Accra), and cusomters expect high quality. Not many 
competitors can target the same segment of customers. We can say that there is only one 
big competitor which can offer similar quality compared to Busy Cyber café.  
 
Interviewee:  The scenario now looks clearer. Our revenues for the café are declining for 
a decrease in volume and not in price. Why is Busy loosing clients in the café?  
 
Interviewer: Good questions. How would you look for that? 
 
Interviewee:  My idea would be to ask the clients. Conduct quality survey; supervise 
customer behaviors, assessing employees’ performances. 
 
Interviewer: It looks like clients are gradually moving to another café since customer 
care and service quality is better. Also PCs in the café at Busy are getting old and many 
of them are not working properly, decreasing actual capacity and customer loyalty 
 
Interviewee:  I have another question, I am still not sure why our revenues in the copy 
center are decreasing while the market and demand for copy center is growing. Is that 
connected with the decrease in traffic of the internet café? 
  
Interviewer: It could be. What other possibilities would you investigate? 


===== PDF p35 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 31 - 
 
Interviewee:  there are many possible issues 
 Quality, our printers are not competitive 
 Customer service, our workforce is not trained  
 Efficiency, probably our printers and copy machine are getting old and they break 
more frequently decreasing volume and customer loyalty 
 Capacity, Busy has probably not set up the right sufficient capacity to meet the 
growing demand for copy center services 
 
Interviewer: Good points, they all make sense. Estelle Akofio-Sowah, the managing 
director of Busy Internet, has just reached us to ask for the executive summary of your 
analysis. What should we tell her? 
 
Interviewee:  It looks like the decrease in profit is due primarily to decrease in revenues 
and in volumes. 
 
 
Revenues 
Cost 
market 
Busy 
Position 
Copy center 
declining 
stable 
growing 
average 
player 
Cyber Café 
declining 
stable 
declining 
major player 
ISP 
growing 
stable 
growing 
major player 
 
Busy must concentrate its investment in the copy center, since it is a growing market. The 
Cyber Cafè is a declining business in a shrinking market, but Busy should keep the Cyber 
Cafè and use it to cross sell other products like ISP and copy center services. Busy should 
invest heavily in customer care, training, performance incentives, technology 
improvement in order to perk up services and increase cafe customers’ loyalty. 
 
ISP is growing. Busy Internet should leverage its client portfolio and its economy of scale 
to anticipate and satisfy client expectations. 
 
 
[Optional questions on implementation] Interviewer: Estelle looks impressed of your 
analysis. But she also looks skeptical on some of the points you have just mentioned. She 
thinks that there are no major problems on the technology side as well as the customer 
care. Investments on these areas are expensive and additional funds from shareholders 
have to be motivated. 
 
 How would you try to convince her that these changes are vital? 
 What approach do you think could convince her? 
 What about the other managers involved in these change? What do you expect 
will be the major issues in implementing change at BusyInternet? 


===== PDF p36 =====
 
Management Consulting Association Case Book 2008 
 
- 32 - 
 How can these changes be sustainable and long-lasting? 
 Why do you think Ghanaians resist changes and like their status-quo? 
 
[These questions are like “bonus questions” and are meant to be asked only to these 
candidates that developed a very good understanding of the economic/problem solving 
side of the case and are ready to give suggestions also on the implementation/leadership 
side. 
 
Rather than asking about previous leadership experiences in which the candidates 
demonstrated motivation, persuasion and other interpersonal skills, this case offers the 
opportunity to “bring the interviewee to Ghana” for 20 minutes and assess his economic 
and interpersonal skills on a real African situation. The last part of the case can be easily 
changed on a role-play interview so to give a more realistic taste to the discussion.] 
 
 
