===== PDF p8 =====
Table of Contents 
 
4
Practice Case 1: Steering wheels  
(A. T. Kearney - Round 1) 
 
I. Case scope provided by interviewer: 
 
The CEO of General Motors attended the Detroit car show recently. 
He was surprised to see that all the models of Volkswagens seemed 
to have the same steering wheel. They seemed similar in all respects 
ñ shape, size, and materials. General Motors, on the other hand, has 
many different steering wheels for its many cars. The CEO feels there 
was merit in reducing the steering wheels on GM cars to one model. 
He wants you to find out how that can be done. 
 
 
II. Additional information provided after relevant questions:  
 
Manufacturing process 
• 
The steering wheel manufacturing process has three distinct stages ñ 
Design, Sourcing/Manufacturing, and Assembling. 
• 
There is virtually no difference in material requirement for each type of 
steering wheel. 
• 
The same injection molding manufacturing process is currently used to 
make the different steering wheels. 
• 
There is virtually no difference in the engineering design requirements 
for each steering wheel. Therefore, from engineering perspective, the 
same wheel could be used on all cars. 
• 
There is no difference in assembly process for the different types of 
steering wheels. 
 
Customer needs 
• 
There is no market requirement (customer driven or company 
promoted) to have different steering wheels on different cars. Steering 
wheels do not serve as product differentiators. 
 
Cost 
• 
GM has 10 lines of cars, each with a different type of steering wheel. 
• 
GM purchases all of the 10 types of steering wheels from the same 
supplier. 
• 
Each year 100,000 steering wheels are bought for each line. 
• 
The steering wheels cost $10 each. 
• 
The supplier gives a 5% discount for every doubling of an order size. 
• 
They also think that by consolidating the steering wheels to one type, 
they can buy all wheels from one vendor. In that case, the vendor will 
give us a 20% discount on the steering wheel.  
 
 
 


===== PDF p9 =====
Table of Contents 
 
5
 
III. Sample solution: 
 
Since GMís business is making and selling cars not steering wheels, they 
were probably looking at this to save costs. So that covered the companyís 
point of view. However, I wanted to make sure that steering wheel types 
donít give GM a competitive advantage or effect consumer demand. That 
took care of competitors and customer part of the picture. The final piece 
was financial cost savings. My approach was to verify these thoughts and put 
together a plan to realize maximum cost savings. 
 
I recommended that the client consolidate the steering wheel types to one 
type and source the steering wheels from one vendor only. This will help the 
client realize cost savings of at least 32%. However, before executing this 
plan the client must make sure that: 
 
• 
There are no peculiar engineering requirements that make the steering 
wheel unfit for a car type. 
• 
The steering wheel type does not adversely affect sale of cars. 
• 
The vendor has sufficient capacity to make at least 10MM steering 
wheels and more as per predicted growth in demand. 
 
There may be other areas like headlights and tail lights, moon roofs, and 
dash board components that could also be consolidated across the different 
cars types. Our team will be willing to explore those areas of cost savings for 
the client as well. 
 
The interviewer was looking to see how well I could gauge a business I knew 
nothing about. He said that he knew I didnít have prior auto industry 
experience and that was why he gave me this case. He wanted to assess if I 
could: 
 
1. identify the key issues 
2. structure the problem in the context of the overall business 
3. make necessary recommendations.  
 
Arriving at the answers was easy. He wanted to see how I arrived at my 
recommendations, and then apply the lessons learnt to other parts of the 
business. 
 
